arXiv:cs/0309048v5  [cs.LO]  17 Dec 2006
TR IDSIA-19-03, V ersion 5
December 2006, arXiv:cs.LO/0309048 v5
(v1: 25 September 2003)
G¨odel Machines: Self-Referential
Universal Problem Solvers Making
Provably Optimal Self-Improvements
J¨ urgen Schmidhuber
IDSIA, Galleria 2, 6928 Manno-Lugano, Switzerland &
TU M ¨unchen, Boltzmannstr . 3, 85748 Garching, M¨unchen, Germany
juergen@idsia.ch - http://www.idsia.ch/˜juergen
Abstract
We present the ﬁrst class of mathematically rigorous, gener al, fully self-referential, self-
improving, optimally efﬁcient problem solvers. Inspired b y Kurt G¨ odel’s celebrated self-
referential formulas (1931), such a problem solver rewrite s any part of its own code as soon
as it has found a proof that the rewrite is useful, where the problem-dependent utility func-
tion and the hardware and the entire initial code are described by axioms encoded in an initial
proof searcher which is also part of the initial code. The sea rcher systematically and in an
asymptotically optimally efﬁcient way tests computable proof techniques (programs whose
outputs are proofs) until it ﬁnds a provably useful, computable self-rewrite. We show that such
a self-rewrite is globally optimal—no local maxima!—since the code ﬁrst had to prove that it
is not useful to continue the proof search for alternative self-rewrites. Unlike Hutter’s previous
non-self-referential methods based on hardwired proof searchers, ours not only boasts an opti-
mal order of complexity but can optimally reduce any slowdowns hiddenby the O()-notation,
provided the utility of such speed-ups is provable at all.
Keywords: self-reference, reinforcement learning, problem solving, proof techniques, optimal
universal search, self-improvement
G¨odel machine publications up to 2006 (100 years after Kurt G¨ odel’s birth, and 75 years
after his landmark paper [11] laying the foundations of theoretical computer science): [45, 47,
48, 49, 50, 51].
Contents
1 Introduction and Outline 2
2 Overview / Basic Ideas / Limitations 2
2.1 Set-up and Formal Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.2 Basic Idea of G¨ odel Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.3 Proof Techniques and an O()-Optimal Initial Proof Searcher . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.4 Limitations of G¨ odel Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
3 Essential Details of One Representative G ¨odel Machine 6
3.1 Proof Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.2 Important Instructions Used by Proof Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
4 Global Optimality Theorem 11
4.1 Globally Optimal Self-Changes, Given u and A Encoded in p . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4.2 Alternative Relaxed Target Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.3 Global Optimality and Recursive Meta-Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.4 How Difﬁcult is it to Prove Target Theorems? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
5 Bias-Optimal Proof Search (BIOPS) 13
5.1 Online Universal Search in Proof Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2 How a Surviving Proof Searcher May Use the Optimal Ordere d Problem Solver to
Solve Remaining Proof Search Tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
6 Discussion & Previous Work 15
6.1 Possible Types of G¨ odel Machine Self-Improvements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
6.2 Example Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.3 Probabilistic G¨ odel Machine Hardware . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6.4 Relations to Previous Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
6.5 Are Humans Probabilistic G¨ odel Machines? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6.6 G¨ odel Machines and Consciousness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
6.7 Frequently Asked Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
7 Conclusion 24
8 Acknowledgments 24
1
1 Introduction and Outline
All traditional algorithms for problem solving / machine learning / reinforcement learning [20] are
hardwired. Some are designed to improve some limited type of policy through experience, but
are not part of the modiﬁable policy, and cannot improve themselves in a theoretically sound way.
Humans are needed to create new / better problem solving algorithms and to prove their usefulness
under appropriate assumptions.
Here we will eliminate the restrictive need for human effort in the most general way possible,
leaving all the work including the proof search to a system th at can rewrite and improve itself
in arbitrary computable ways and in a most efﬁcient fashion. To attack this “Grand Problem
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence” [46], we introduce a novel class of optimal, fully self-refe rential [11]
general problem solvers called G¨odel machines [45, 47, 49, 51, 50]. 1 They are universal problem
solving systems that interact with some (partially observa ble) environment and can in principle
modify themselves without essential limits apart from the l imits of computability. Their initial
algorithm is not hardwired; it can completely rewrite itself, but only if a proof searcher embedded
within the initial algorithm can ﬁrst prove that the rewrite is useful, given a formalized utility
function reﬂecting computation time and expected future su ccess (e.g., rewards). We will see that
self-rewrites due to this approach are actually globally optimal (Theorem 4.1, Section 4), relative
to G¨ odel’s well-known fundamental restrictions of provability [11]. These restrictions should not
worry us; if there is no proof of some self-rewrite’s utility, then humans cannot do much either.
The initial proof searcher is O()-optimal (has an optimal order of complexity) in the sense of
Theorem 5.1, Section 5. Unlike hardwired systems such as Hut ter’s [16, 17] and Levin’s [24, 26]
(Section 6.4), however, a G¨ odel machine can in principle sp eed up any part of its initial soft-
ware, including its proof searcher, to meet arbitrary formalizable notions of optimality beyond
those expressible in the O()-notation. Our approach yields the ﬁrst theoretically soun d, fully self-
referential, optimal, general problem solvers.
Outline. Section 2 presents basic concepts and fundamental limitati ons, Section 3 the essential
details of a self-referential axiomatic system, Section 4 t he Global Optimality Theorem 4.1, and
Section 5 the O()-optimal (Theorem 5.1) initial proof searcher. Section 6 pr ovides examples and
relations to previous work, brieﬂy discusses issues such as a technical justiﬁcation of conscious-
ness, and lists answers to several frequently asked questions about G¨ odel machines.
2 Overview / Basic Ideas / Limitations
Many traditional problems of computer science require just one problem-deﬁning input at the be-
ginning of the problem solving process. For example, the ini tial input may be a large integer, and
the goal may be to factorize it. In what follows, however, we w ill also consider the more general
case where the problem solution requires interaction with a dyna mic, initially unknown environ-
ment that produces a continual stream of inputs and feedbacksignals, such as in autonomous robot
control tasks, where the goal may be to maximize expected cum ulative future reward [20]. This
1Or ‘Goedel machine’ , to avoid the Umlaut. But ‘Godel machine’ would not be quite correct. Not to be confused
with what Penrose calls, in a different context, ‘G ¨odel’s putative theorem-proving machine’ [30]!
2
may require the solution of essentially arbitrary problems (examples in Section 6.2 formulate tra-
ditional problems as special cases).
2.1 Set-up and Formal Goal
Our hardware (e.g., a universal or space-bounded Turing mac hine [61] or the abstract model of a
personal computer) has a single life which consists of discr ete cycles or time steps t = 1 , 2, . . ..
Its total lifetime T may or may not be known in advance. In what follows, the value o f any time-
varying variable Q at time t will be denoted by Q(t).
During each cycle our hardware executes an elementary opera tion which affects its variable
state s ∈ S ⊂ B ∗ (without loss of generality, B∗ is the set of possible bitstrings over the binary
alphabet B = {0, 1}) and possibly also the variable environmental state Env ∈ E (here we need
not yet specify the problem-dependent set E). There is a hardwired state transition function F :
S × E → S . For t > 1, s(t) = F (s(t − 1), Env(t − 1)) is the state at a point where the hardware
operation of cycle t − 1 is ﬁnished, but the one of t has not started yet. Env(t) may depend on past
output actions encoded in s(t − 1) and is simultaneously updated or (probabilistically) comp uted
by the possibly reactive environment.
In order to talk conveniently about programs and data, we wil l often attach names to certain
string variables encoded as components or substrings of s. Of particular interest are the three
variables called time, x, y, and p:
1. At time t, variable time holds a unique binary representation of t. We initialize time(1) =
‘1’, the bitstring consisting only of a one. The hardware increments time from one cycle to
the next. This requires at most O(log t) and on average only O(1) computational steps.
2. Variable x holds the inputs from the environment to the G¨ odel machine.For t > 1, x(t) may
differ from x(t − 1) only if a program running on the G¨ odel machine has executed aspecial
input-requesting instruction at time t−1. Generally speaking, the delays between successive
inputs should be sufﬁciently large so that programs can perf orm certain elementary compu-
tations on an input, such as copying it into internal storage (a reserved part of s) before the
next input arrives.
3. Variable y holds the outputs of the G¨ odel machine. y(t) is an output bitstring which may
subsequently inﬂuence the environment, where y(1) = ‘0 ’ by default. For example, y(t)
could be interpreted as a control signal for an environment-manipulating robot whose actions
may have an effect on future inputs.
4. p(1) is the initial software: a program implementing the origina l (sub-optimal) policy for
interacting with the environment, represented as a substri ng e(1) of p(1), plus the original
policy for searching proofs. Details will be discussed below.
At any given time t (1 ≤ t ≤ T ) the goal is to maximize future success or utility. A typical
“value to go” utility function is of the form u(s, Env) : S × E → R , where R is the set of real
numbers:
u(s, Env) = Eµ
[ T∑
τ =time
r(τ )
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐ s, Env
]
, (1)
3
where r(t) is a real-valued reward input (encoded within s(t)) at time t, Eµ (· | · ) denotes the
conditional expectation operator with respect to some poss ibly unknown distribution µ from a
set M of possible distributions ( M reﬂects whatever is known about the possibly probabilistic
reactions of the environment), and the above-mentioned time = time(s) is a function of state
s which uniquely identiﬁes the current cycle. Note that we tak e into account the possibility of
extending the expected lifespan through appropriate actions.
Alternative formalizable utility functions could favor im provement of worst case instead of
expected future performance, or higher reward intake per time interval etc. Clearly, most classic
problems of computer science can be formulated in this framework—see examples in Section 6.2.
2.2 Basic Idea of G ¨odel Machine
Our machine becomes a self-referential [11] G¨odel machine by loading it with a particular form
of machine-dependent, self-modifying code p. The initial code p(1) at time step 1 includes a
(typically sub-optimal) problem solving subroutine e(1) for interacting with the environment, such
as any traditional reinforcement learning algorithm [20], and a general proof searcher subroutine
(Section 5) that systematically makes pairs (switchprog, proof) (variable substrings of s) until
it ﬁnds a proof of a target theorem which essentially states: ‘the immediate rewrite of p through
current program switchprog on the given machine implies higher utility than leaving p as is’. Then
it executes switchprog, which may completely rewrite p, including the proof searcher. Section 3
will explain details of the necessary initial axiomatic system A encoded in p(1). Compare Fig. 1.
The Global Optimality Theorem (Theorem 4.1, Section 4) shows this self-improvement strategy
is not greedy: since the utility of ‘leaving p as is’ implicitly evaluates all possible alternative
switchprogs which an unmodiﬁed p might ﬁnd later, we obtain a globally optimal self-change—
the current switchprog represents the best of all possible relevant self-changes,relative to the given
resource limitations and initial proof search strategy.
2.3 Proof Techniques and an O()-Optimal Initial Proof Searcher
Section 5 will present an O()-optimal initialization of the proof searcher, that is, one with an opti-
mal order of complexity (Theorem 5.1). Still, there will remain a lot of room for self-improvement
hidden by the O()-notation. The searcher uses an online extension of Universal Search [24, 26]
to systematically test online proof techniques, which are proof-generating programs that may read
parts of state s (similarly, mathematicians are often more interested in pr oof techniques than in
theorems). To prove target theorems as above, proof techniq ues may invoke special instructions
for generating axioms and applying inference rules to prolong the current proof by theorems. Here
an axiomatic system A encoded in p(1) includes axioms describing (a) how any instruction in-
voked by a program running on the given hardware will change t he machine’s state s (including
instruction pointers etc.) from one step to the next (such that proof techniques can reason about the
effects of any program including the proof searcher), (b) the initial program p(1) itself (Section 3
will show that this is possible without introducing circula rity), (c) stochastic environmental prop-
erties, (d) the formal utility function u, e.g., equation (1), which takes into account computational
costs of all actions including proof search.
4
temporary storage of e(1)
initial problem solver e(1) for
interaction with environment
axioms for hard−
ware, initial soft−
ware, environment,
costs & goals
proof technique
tester
initial
proof
searcher:
currently tested
proof technique
switchbit
switchprog
proof
temporary storage
of proof technique
storage
writable
by proof
searcher:
output y
input x
time
other hardware variables
writable by switchprog
proof techniques
writable by
storage readable by proof techniques
ENVIRONMENT
initial software p(1)
writable
hardware−
Figure 1: Storage snapshot of a not yet self-improved example G¨ odel machine, with the initial software
still intact. See text for details.
2.4 Limitations of G ¨odel Machines
The fundamental limitations are closely related to those ﬁr st identiﬁed by G¨ odel’s celebrated pa-
per on self-referential formulae [11]. Any formal system th at encompasses arithmetics (or ZFC
etc) is either ﬂawed or allows for unprovable but true statem ents. Hence even a G¨ odel machine
with unlimited computational resources must ignore those self-improvements whose effectiveness
it cannot prove, e.g., for lack of sufﬁciently powerful axioms in A. In particular, one can construct
pathological examples of environments and utility functio ns that make it impossible for the ma-
chine to ever prove a target theorem. Compare Blum’s speed-u p theorem [3, 4] based on certain
incomputable predicates. Similarly, a realistic G¨ odel machine with limited resources cannot proﬁt
from self-improvements whose usefulness it cannot prove within its time and space constraints.
Nevertheless, unlike previous methods, it can in principle exploit at least the provably good
speed-ups of any part of its initial software, including those parts responsible for huge (but problem
class-independent) slowdowns ignored by the earlier approaches [16, 17] (Section 6.4).
5
3 Essential Details of One Representative G ¨odel Machine
Notation. Unless stated otherwise or obvious, throughout the paper ne wly introduced variables
and functions are assumed to cover the range implicit in the c ontext. l(q) denotes the number of
bits in a bitstring q; qn the n-th bit of q; λ the empty string (where l(λ) = 0 ); qm:n = λ if m > n
and qmqm+1 . . . qn otherwise (where q0 := q0:0 := λ).
Theorem proving requires an axiom scheme yielding an enumerable set of axioms of a formal
logic system A whose formulas and theorems are symbol strings over some ﬁni te alphabet that
may include traditional symbols of logic (such as →, ∧, =, (, ), ∀, ∃, . . ., c1, c2, . . . , f1, f2, . . .),
probability theory (such as E(·), the expectation operator), arithmetics ( +, −, /, =, ∑ , <, . . .),
string manipulation (in particular, symbols for representing any part of state s at any time, such as
s7:88(5555)). A proof is a sequence of theorems, each either an axiom or in ferred from previous
theorems by applying one of the inference rules such as modus ponens combined with uniﬁcation ,
e.g., [10].
The remainder of this paper will omit standard knowledge to b e found in any proof theory
textbook. Instead of listing all axioms of a particular A in a tedious fashion, we will focus on the
novel and critical details: how to overcome potential problems with self-reference and how to deal
with the potentially delicate online generation of proofs t hat talk about and affect the currently
running proof generator itself.
3.1 Proof Techniques
Brute force proof searchers (used in Hutter’s work [16, 17]; see Section 6.4 for a review) sys-
tematically generate all proofs in order of their sizes. To p roduce a certain proof, this takes time
exponential in proof size. Instead our O()-optimal p(1) will produce many proofs with low algo-
rithmic complexity [57, 22, 27] much more quickly. It systematically tests (see Section 5) programs
called proof techniques written in universal language L implemented within p(1). For example,
L may be a variant of PROLOG [7] or the universal F ORTH[29]-inspired programming language
used in recent work on optimal search [48]. A proof technique is composed of instructions that
allow any part of s to be read, such as inputs encoded in variablex (a substring of s) or the code of
p(1). It may write on sp, a part of s reserved for temporary results. It also may rewrite switchprog,
and produce an incrementally growing proof placed in the string variable proof stored somewhere
in s. proof and sp are reset to the empty string at the beginning of each new proo f technique
test. Apart from standard arithmetic and function-deﬁning instructions [48] that modify sp, the
programming language L includes special instructions (details in Section 3.2) for prolonging the
current proof by correct theorems, for setting switchprog, and for checking whether a provably
optimal p-modifying program was found and should be executed now. Certain long proofs can be
produced by short proof techniques.
3.2 Important Instructions Used by Proof Techniques
The nature of the six proof-modifying instructions below (there are no others) makes it impossible
to insert an incorrect theorem into proof, thus trivializing proof veriﬁcation. Let us ﬁrst provide a
6
brief overview of the most important instructions:get-axiom(n) appends the n-th possible axiom to
the current proof, apply-rule(k, m, n) applies the k-th inference rule to the m-th and n-th theorem
in the current proof (appending the result), set-switchprog(m,n) sets switchprog := sp
m:n, and
check() tests whether the last theorem in proof is a target theorem showing that a self-rewrite
through switchprog would be useful. The details are as follows.
1. get-axiom(n) takes as argument an integer n computed by a preﬁx of the currently tested
proof technique with the help of arithmetic instructions such as those used in previous work
[48]. Then it appends the n-th axiom (if it exists, according to the axiom scheme below) as
a theorem to the current theorem sequence in proof. The initial axiom scheme encodes:
(a) Hardware axioms describing the hardware, formally specifying how certain c ompo-
nents of s (other than environmental inputs x) may change from one cycle to the next.
For example, if the hardware is a Turing machine2 (TM) [61], thens(t) is a bitstring that
encodes the current contents of all tapes of the TM, the positions of its scanning heads,
and the current internal state of the TM’s ﬁnite state automaton, while F speciﬁes
the TM’s look-up table which maps any possible combination of internal state and bits
above scanning heads to a new internal state and an action such as: replace some head’s
current bit by 1/0, increment (right shift) or decrement (left shift) some scanning head,
read and copy next input bit to cell above input tape’s scanning head, etc.
Alternatively, if the hardware is given by the abstract model of a modern microproces-
sor with limited storage, s(t) will encode the current storage contents, register values,
instruction pointers etc.
For instance, the following axiom could describe how some 64-bit hardware’s instruc-
tion pointer stored in s1:64 is continually incremented as long as there is no overﬂow
and the value of s65 does not indicate that a jump to some other address should tak e
place:
(∀t∀n : [(n < 264 − 1) ∧ (n > 0) ∧ (t > 1) ∧ (t < T )
∧(string2num(s1:64(t)) = n) ∧ (s65(t) = ‘0’)]
→ (string2num(s1:64(t + 1)) = n + 1))
Here the semantics of used symbols such as ‘(’ and ‘ >’ and ‘→’ (implies) are the
traditional ones, while ‘string2num’ symbolizes a function translating bitstrings into
numbers. It is clear that any abstract hardware model can be f ully axiomatized in a
similar way.
(b) Reward axioms deﬁning the computational costs of any hardware instructio n, and
physical costs of output actions, such as control signals y(t) encoded in s(t). Re-
lated axioms assign values to certain input events (encoded in variable x, a substring
of s) representing reward or punishment (e.g., when a G¨ odel machine-controlled robot
2Turing reformulated G¨ odel’s unprovability results in terms of Turing machines (TMs) [61] which subsequently
became the most widely used abstract model of computation. I t is well-known that there are universal TMs that in a
certain sense can emulate any other TM or any other known computer. G¨ odel’s integer-based formal language can be
used to describe any universal TM, and vice versa.
7
bumps into an obstacle). Additional axioms deﬁne the total v alue of the G¨ odel ma-
chine’s life as a scalar-valued function of all rewards (e.g., their sum) and costs expe-
rienced between cycles 1 and T , etc. For example, assume that s17:18 can be changed
only through external inputs; the following example axiom s ays that the total reward
increases by 3 whenever such an input equals ‘11’ (unexplained symbols carry the ob-
vious meaning):
(∀t1∀t2 : [(t1 < t 2) ∧ (t1 ≥ 1) ∧ (t2 ≤ T ) ∧ (s17:18(t2) = ‘11’)]
→ [R(t1, t2) = R(t1, t2 − 1) + 3]),
where R(t1, t2) is interpreted as the cumulative reward between times t1 and t2. It
is clear that any formal scheme for producing rewards can be f ully axiomatized in a
similar way.
(c) Environment axioms restricting the way the environment will produce new inputs(en-
coded within certain substrings of s) in reaction to sequences of outputs y encoded in
s. For example, it may be known in advance that the environment is sampled from an
unknown probability distribution µ contained in a given setM of possible distributions
(compare equation 1). E.g., M may contain all distributions that are computable, given
the previous history [57, 58, 16], or at least limit-computa ble [41, 42]. Or, more re-
strictively, the environment may be some unknown but deterministic computer program
[63, 39] sampled from the Speed Prior [43] which assigns low p robability to environ-
ments that are hard to compute by any method. Or the interface to the environment is
Markovian [35], that is, the current input always uniquely identiﬁes the environmental
state—a lot of work has already been done on this special case [33, 2, 60]. Even more
restrictively, the environment may evolve in completely pr edictable fashion known in
advance. All such prior assumptions are perfectly formaliz able in an appropriate A
(otherwise we could not write scientiﬁc papers about them).
(d) Uncertainty axioms; string manipulation axioms: Standard axioms for arithmetics
and calculus and probability theory [21] and statistics and string manipulation that (in
conjunction with the hardware axioms and environment axioms) allow for constructing
proofs concerning (possibly uncertain) properties of futu re values of s(t) as well as
bounds on expected remaining lifetime / costs / rewards, given some time τ and certain
hypothetical values for components ofs(τ ) etc. An example theorem saying something
about expected properties of future inputs x might look like this:
(∀t1∀µ ∈ M : [(1 ≤ t1) ∧ (t1 + 15597 < T ) ∧ (s5:9(t1) = ‘01011’)
∧(x40:44(t1) = ‘00000’)] → (∃t : [(t1 < t < t 1 + 15597)
∧(Pµ (x17:22(t) = ‘011011’ | s(t1)) > 998
1000)])),
where Pµ (. | .) represents a conditional probability with respect to an axiomatized prior
distribution µ from a set of distributionsM described by the environment axioms (Item
1c).
Given a particular formalizable hardware (Item 1a) and formalizable assumptions about
the possibly probabilistic environment (Item 1c), obvious ly one can fully axiomatize
8
everything that is needed for proof-based reasoning about p ast and future machine
states.
(e) Initial state axioms: Information about how to reconstruct the initial states(1) or parts
thereof, such that the proof searcher can build proofs including axioms of the type
(sm:n(1) = z), e.g. : ( s7:9(1) = ‘010’).
Here and in the remainder of the paper we use bold font in formulas to indicate syntactic
place holders (such as m,n,z) for symbol strings representing variables (such as m,n,z)
whose semantics are explained in the text—in the present con text z is the bitstring
sm:n(1).
Note that it is no fundamental problem to fully encode both the hardware description
and the initial hardware-describing p within p itself. To see this, observe that some
software may include a program that can print the software.
(f) Utility axioms describing the overall goal in the form of utility function u; e.g., equa-
tion (1) in Section 2.1.
2. apply-rule(k, m, n) takes as arguments the index k (if it exists) of an inference rule such
as modus ponens (stored in a list of possible inference rules encoded within p(1)) and the
indices m, n of two previously proven theorems (numbered in order of their creation) in the
current proof. If applicable, the corresponding inference rule is applie d to the addressed
theorems and the resulting theorem appended to proof. Otherwise the currently tested proof
technique is interrupted. This ensures that proof is never fed with invalid proofs.
3. delete-theorem(m) deletes the m-th theorem in the currently stored proof, thus freeing stor-
age such that proof-storing parts of s can be reused and the maximal proof size is not nec-
essarily limited by storage constraints. Theorems deleted from proof, however, cannot be
addressed any more by apply-rule to produce further prolongations of proof.
4. set-switchprog(m,n) replaces switchprog by sp
m:n, provided thatsp
m:n is indeed a non-empty
substring of sp, the storage writable by proof techniques.
5. check() veriﬁes whether the goal of the proof search has been reached. First it tests whether
the last theorem (if any) in proof has the form of a target theorem. A target theorem states
that given the current axiomatized utility function u (Item 1f), the utility of a switch from
p to the current switchprog would be higher than the utility of continuing the execution of
p (which would keep searching for alternative switchprogs). Target theorems are symbol
strings (encoded in s) of the (decoded) form
(u[s(t1) ⊕ (switchbit(t1) = ‘1’), Env(t1)] >
u[s(t1) ⊕ (switchbit(t1) = ‘0’), Env(t1)]) (2)
where the variable t1 (represented by syntactic place holder t1) stands for a time step, while
all other symbols belong to the alphabet of the theorem-prov ing calculus, that is, the set
of possible target theorems is parameterized only by t1. Here the calculus should permit
9
the notation s(t1) ⊕ (switchbit(t1) = ‘ b’) as a shortcut for the state obtained when we
replace switchbit(t1), the true value of the variable bitswitchbit (encoded in s) at time t1, by
b ∈ {0, 1}. This will facilitate the formulation of theorems that compare values conditioned
on various alternative hypothetical properties ofs(t1). (Note that s(t1) may be only partially
known by the current proof technique even in environments wh ere s(t1) and switchbit(t1)
are fully predetermined for all valid t1.)
The purpose of introducing t1 is to deal with hardware-speciﬁc temporal delays that may
be involved in checking and switching—it may take a signiﬁca nt amount of time to match
abstract symbol strings found during proof search to the G¨ odel machine’s real current state.
If a target theorem has been found, check() uses a simple prewired subroutine (also encoded
in p(1), of course) to check whether there is enough time left to set variable switchbit (orig-
inally 0) to 1 before the continually increasing time will equal t1. If this subroutine returns
a negative result, check() exits. Otherwise it sets switchbit := 1 (there is no other way of
changing switchbit). Then it repeatedly tests time until time > t 1, to make sure the con-
dition of formula (2) was fulﬁlled at t1. Then it transfers control to switchprog (there is no
other way of calling switchprog). The switchprog may subsequently rewrite all parts of s,
excluding hardware-reserved parts such as time and x, but including p.
6. state2theorem(m, n) takes two integer arguments m, n and tries to transform the current
contents of sm:n into a theorem of the form
(sm:n(t1) = z), e.g. : ( s6:9(7775555) = ‘1001’),
where t1 represents a time measured (by checking time) shortly after state2theorem was
invoked, and z the bistring sm:n(t1) (recall the special case t1 = 1 of Item 1e). So we accept
the time-labeled current observable contents of any part of s as a theorem that does not have
to be proven in an alternative way from, say, the initial stat e s(1), because the computation
so far has already demonstrated that the theorem is true. Thu s we may exploit information
conveyed by environmental inputs, and the fact that sometim es (but not always) the fastest
way to determine the output of a program is to run it.
This non-traditional online interface between syntax and s emantics requires special care
though. We must avoid inconsistent results through parts of s that change while being read.
F or example, the present value of a quickly changing instruc tion pointer IP (continually
updated by the hardware) may be essentially unreadable in the sense that the execution of the
reading subroutine itself will already modify IP many times. F or convenience, the (typically
limited) hardware could be set up such that it stores the cont ents of fast hardware variables
every c cycles in a reserved part of s, such that an appropriate variant of state2theorem()
could at least translate certain recent values of fast varia bles into theorems. This, however ,
will not abolish all problems associated with self-observations. F or example, the sm:n to
be read might also contain the reading procedure’s own, temp orary, constantly changing
string pointer variables, etc. 3 To address such problems on computers with limited memory,
3We see that certain parts of the current s may not be directly observable without changing the observa ble itself.
Sometimes, however, axioms and previous observations willallow the G¨ odel machine todeduce time-dependent stor-
age contents that are not directly observable. For instance , by analyzing the code being executed through instruction
pointer IP in the example above, the value of IP at certain times may be predictable (or postdictable, after the fact).
10
state2theorem ﬁrst uses some ﬁxed protocol (encoded in p(1), of course) to check whether
the current sm:n is readable at all or whether it might change if it were read by the remaining
code of state2theorem. If so, or if m, n, are not in the proper range, then the instruction has
no further effect. Otherwise it appends an observed theorem of the form (sm:n(t1) = z) to
proof. F or example, if the current time is 7770000, then the invocation of state2theorem(6,9)
might return the theorem (s6:9(7775555) = ‘1001 ’), where 7775555 − 7770000 = 5555
reﬂects the time needed by state2theorem to perform the initial check and to read leading
bits off the continually increasing time (reading time also costs time) such that it can be
sure that 7775555 is a recent proper time label following the start of state2theorem.
The axiomatic system A is a deﬁning parameter of a given G¨ odel machine. Clearly,A must be
strong enough to permit proofs of target theorems. In partic ular, the theory of uncertainty axioms
(Item 1d) must be sufﬁciently rich. This is no fundamental problem: we simply insert all traditional
axioms of probability theory [21].
4 Global Optimality Theorem
Intuitively, at any given time p should execute some self-modiﬁcation algorithm (via instr uction
check()—Item 5 above) only if it is the ‘best’ of all possible self-mo diﬁcations, given the utility
function, which typically depends on available resources, such as storage size and remaining life-
time. At ﬁrst glance, however, target theorem (2) seems to im plicitly talk about just one single
modiﬁcation algorithm, namely, switchprog(t1) as set by the systematic proof searcher at time t1.
Isn’t this type of local search greedy? Couldn’t it lead to a local optimum instead of a global one?
No, it cannot, according to the following global optimality theorem.
4.1 Globally Optimal Self-Changes, Given u and A Encoded in p
Theorem 4.1 Given any formalizable utility function u (Item 1f), and assuming consistency of the
underlying formal system A, any self-change of p obtained through execution of some program
switchprog identiﬁed through the proof of a target theorem (2) is global ly optimal in the following
sense: the utility of starting the execution of the present switchprog is higher than the utility of
waiting for the proof searcher to produce an alternative switchprog later .
Proof. Target theorem (2) implicitly talks about all the other switchprogs that the proof searcher
could produce in the future. To see this, consider the two alt ernatives of the binary decision:
(1) either execute the current switchprog (set switchbit = 1 ), or (2) keep searching for proofs
and switchprogs (set switchbit = 0 ) until the systematic searcher comes up with an even better
switchprog. Obviously the second alternative concerns all (possibly i nﬁnitely many) potential
switchprogs to be considered later. That is, if the current switchprog were not the ‘best’, then
The values of other variables at given times, however, may no t be deducible at all. Such limits of self-observability
are reminiscent of Heisenberg’s celebrated uncertainty principle [12], which states that certain physical measurements
are necessarily imprecise, since the measuring process affects the measured quantity.
11
the proof searcher would not be able to prove that setting switchbit and executing switchprog will
cause higher expected reward than discarding switchprog, assuming consistency of A. Q.E.D.
The initial proof searcher of Section 5 already generates al l possible proofs and switchprogs
in O()-optimal fashion. Nevertheless, since it is part of p(1), its proofs can speak about the proof
searcher itself, possibly triggering proof searcher rewri tes resulting in better than merely O()-
optimal performance.
4.2 Alternative Relaxed Target Theorem
We may replace the target theorem (2) (Item 5) by the following alternative target theorem:
(u[s(t1) ⊕ (switchbit(t1) = ‘1’), Env(t1)] ≥
u[s(t1) ⊕ (switchbit(t1) = ‘0’), Env(t1)]) (3)
The only difference to the original target theorem (2) is that the “>” sign became a “≥” sign. That
is, the G¨ odel machine will change itself as soon as it has fou nd a proof that the change will not
make things worse. A Global Optimality Theorem similar to Th eorem 4.1 holds; simply replace
the last phrase in Theorem 4.1 by: the utility of starting the execution of the present switchprog is
at least as high as the utility of waiting for the proof search er to produce an alternative switchprog
later .
4.3 Global Optimality and Recursive Meta-Levels
One of the most important aspects of our fully self-referent ial set-up is the following. Any proof
of a target theorem automatically proves that the correspon ding self-modiﬁcation is good for all
further self-modiﬁcations affected by the present one, in recursive fashion. In that sense all possible
“meta-levels” of the self-referential system are collapsed into one.
4.4 How Difﬁcult is it to Prove Target Theorems?
This depends on the tasks and the initial axioms A, of course. It is straight-forward to devise
simple tasks and corresponding consistent A such that there are short and trivial proofs of target
theorems.
Even when we initialize the initial problem solver e(1) by an asymptotically optimal, rather
general method such as Hutter’s AIXI (t,l) [16, 19], it may be straight-forward to prove that switch-
ing to another strategy is useful, especially whenA contains additional prior knowledge in form of
axiomatic assumptions beyond those made by A IXI (t,l). The latter needs a very time-consuming
but constant set-up phase whose costs disappear in the O()-notation but not in a utility function
such as the u of equation (1). For example, simply construct an environme nt where maximal re-
ward is achieved by performing a never-ending sequence of si mple but rewarding actions, say,
repeatedly pressing a lever, plus a very simple axiomatic sy stem A that permits a short proof
showing that it is useful to interrupt the non-rewarding set-up phase and start pressing the lever.
12
On the other hand, it is possible to construct situations whe re it is impossible to prove target
theorems, for example, by using results of undecidability t heory, e.g., [11, 32, 3, 4]. In particular,
adopting the extreme notion of triviality embodied by Rice’s theorem [32] (any nontrivial property
over general functions is undecidable), only trivial improvements of a given strategy may be prov-
ably useful. This notion of triviality, however, clearly does not reﬂect what is intuitively regarded
as trivial by scientists. Although many theorems of the mach ine learning literature in particular,
and the computer science literature in general, are limitedto functional properties that are trivial in
the sense of Rice, they are widely regarded as non-trivial in an intuitive sense. In fact, the inﬁnite
domains of function classes addressed by Rice’s theorem are irrelevant not only for most scien-
tists dealing with real world problems but also for a typical G¨ odel machine dealing with a limited
number of events that may occur within its limited life time. Generally speaking, in between the
obviously trivial and the obviously non-trivial cases there are many less obvious ones. The point is:
usually we do not know in advance whether it is possible or not to change a given initial problem
solver in a provably good way. The traditional approach is to invest human research effort into
ﬁnding out. A G¨ odel machine, however, can do this by itself, without essential limits apart from
those of computability and provability.
Note that to prove a target theorem, a proof technique does not necessarily have to compute the
true expected utilities of switching and not switching—it j ust needs to determine which is higher.
For example, it may be easy to prove that speeding up a subrout ine of the proof searcher by a
factor of 2 will certainly be worth the negligible (compared to lifetime T ) time needed to execute
the subroutine-changing algorithm, no matter what is the precise utility of the switch.
5 Bias-Optimal Proof Search (BIOPS)
Here we construct an initial p(1) that is O()-optimal in a certain limited sense to be described
below, but still might be improved as it is not necessarily op timal in the sense of the given u (for
example, the u of equation (1) neither mentions nor cares for O()-optimality). Our Bias-Optimal
Proof Search (BIOPS) is essentially an application of Universal Search [24, 26] to proof search.
One novelty, however, is this: Previous practical variantsand extensions of Universal Search have
been applied [38, 40, 55, 48] to ofﬂine program search tasks where the program inputs are ﬁxed
such that the same program always produces the same results. In our online setting, however,
BIOPS has to take into account that the same proof technique s tarted at different times may yield
different proofs, as it may read parts of s (e.g., inputs) that change as the machine’s life proceeds.
5.1 Online Universal Search in Proof Space
BIOPS starts with a probability distribution P (the initial bias) on the proof techniques w that
one can write in L, e.g., P (w) = K − l(w) for programs composed from K possible instructions
[26]. BIOPS is near-bias-optimal [48] in the sense that it will not spend much more time on any
proof technique than it deserves, according to its probabil istic bias, namely, not much more than
its probability times the total search time:
Deﬁnition 5.1 (Bias-Optimal Searchers [48]) Let R be a problem class, C be a search space of
solution candidates (where any problem r ∈ R should have a solution in C), P (q | r) be a task-
13
dependent bias in the form of conditional probability distr ibutions on the candidates q ∈ C . Sup-
pose that we also have a predeﬁned procedure that creates and tests any given q on any r ∈ R
within time t(q, r) (typically unknown in advance). Then a searcher is n-bias-optimal (n ≥ 1) if
for any maximal total search time Ttotal > 0 it is guaranteed to solve any problem r ∈ R if it has
a solution p ∈ C satisfying t(p, r) ≤ P (p | r) Ttotal/n. It is bias-optimal if n = 1.
Method 5.1 (BIOPS) In phase (i = 1, 2, 3, . . .) DO: F OR all self-delimiting [26] proof techniques
w ∈ L satisfying P (w) ≥ 2− i DO:
1. Run w until halt or error (such as division by zero) or 2iP (w) steps consumed.
2. Undo effects of w on sp (does not cost signiﬁcantly more time than executing w).
A proof technique w can interrupt Method 5.1 only by invoking instructioncheck() (Item 5), which
may transfer control to switchprog (which possibly even will delete or rewrite Method 5.1). Since
the initial p runs on the formalized hardware, and since proof techniquestested by p can read p and
other parts of s, they can produce proofs concerning the (expected) perform ance of p and BIOPS
itself. Method 5.1 at least has the optimal order of computational complexity in the following
sense.
Theorem 5.1 If independently of variable time(s) some unknown fast proof technique w would
require at most f (k) steps to produce a proof of difﬁculty measure k (an integer depending on the
nature of the task to be solved), then Method 5.1 will need at m ost O(f (k)) steps.
Proof. It is easy to see that Method 5.1 will need at most O(f (k)/P (w)) = O(f (k)) steps—the
constant factor 1/P (w) does not depend on k. Q.E.D.
The initial proof search itself is merely O()-optimal. Note again, however, that the proofs
themselves may concern quite different, arbitrary formalizable notions of optimality (stronger than
those expressible in the O()-notation) embodied by the given, problem-speciﬁc, formalized utility
function u, in particular, the maximum future reward in the sense of equation (1). This may provoke
useful, constant-affecting rewrites of the initial proof searcher despite its limited (yet popular and
widely used) notion of O()-optimality. Once a useful rewrite has been found and execut ed after
some initial fraction of the G¨ odel machine’s total lifetime, the restrictions of O()-optimality need
not be an issue any more.
5.2 How a Surviving Proof Searcher May Use the Optimal Ordere d Prob-
lem Solver to Solve Remaining Proof Search Tasks
The following is not essential for this paper. Let us assume t hat the execution of the switchprog
corresponding to the ﬁrst found target theorem has not rewri tten the code of p itself—the current
p is still equal to p(1)—and has reset switchbit and returned control to p such that it can continue
where it was interrupted. In that case the B IOPS subroutine of p(1) can use the Optimal Ordered
Problem Solver OOPS [48] to accelerate the search for the n-th target theorem (n > 1) by reusing
proof techniques for earlier found target theorems where po ssible. The basic ideas are as follows
(details: [48]).
14
Whenever a target theorem has been proven,p(1) freezes the corresponding proof technique: it
becomes non-writable by proof techniques to be tested in later proof search tasks, but remains read-
able, such that it can be copy-edited and/or invoked as a subp rogram by future proof techniques.
We also allow preﬁxes of proof techniques to temporarily rew rite the probability distribution on
their sufﬁxes [48], thus essentially rewriting the probability-based search procedure (an incremen-
tal extension of Method 5.1) based on previous experience. A s a side-effect we metasearch for
faster search procedures, which can greatly accelerate the learning of new tasks [48].
Given a new proof search task, BIOPS performs OOPS by spending half the total search time on
a variant of Method 5.1 that searches only among self-delimiting [25, 6] proof techniques starting
with the most recently frozen proof technique. The rest of th e time is spent on fresh proof tech-
niques with arbitrary preﬁxes (which may reuse previously f rozen proof techniques though) [48].
(We could also search for a generalizing proof technique solving all proof search tasks so far. In
the ﬁrst half of the search we would not have to test proof techniques on tasks other than the most
recent one, since we already know that their preﬁxes solve the previous tasks [48].)
It can be shown that O OPS is essentially 8-bias-optimal (see Def. 5.1), given either the initial
bias or intermediate biases due to frozen solutions to previous tasks [48]. This result immediately
carries over to BIOPS . To summarize, B IOPS essentially allocates part of the total search time for
a new task to proof techniques that exploit previous success ful proof techniques in computable
ways. If the new task can be solved faster by copy-editing / in voking previously frozen proof
techniques than by solving the new proof search task from scr atch, then B IOPS will discover this
and proﬁt thereof. If not, then at least it will not be signiﬁc antly slowed down by the previous
solutions—B IOPS will remain 8-bias-optimal.
Recall, however, that B IOPS is not the only possible way of initializing the G¨ odel machine’s
proof searcher. The Global Optimality Theorem 4.1 (Section 4) expresses optimality with respect
to whichever initial proof searcher we choose.
6 Discussion & Previous Work
Here we list a few examples of possible types of self-improvements (Section 6.1), G¨ odel machine
applicability to various tasks deﬁned by various utility fu nctions and environments (Section 6.2),
probabilistic hardware (Section 6.3), and relations to previous work (Section 6.4). We also brieﬂy
discuss self-reference and consciousness (Section 6.6), and provide a list of answers to frequently
asked questions (Section 6.7).
6.1 Possible Types of G ¨odel Machine Self-Improvements
Which provably useful self-modiﬁcations are possible? The re are few limits to what a G¨ odel
machine might do.
1. In one of the simplest cases it might leave its basic proof s earcher intact and just change
the ratio of time-sharing between the proof searching subroutine and the subpolicy e—those
parts of p responsible for interaction with the environment.
15
2. Or the G¨ odel machine might modifye only. For example, the initial e(1) may be a program
that regularly stores limited memories of past events somew here in s; this might allow p to
derive that it would be useful to modify e such that e will conduct certain experiments to
increase the knowledge about the environment, and use the resulting information to increase
reward intake. In this sense the G¨ odel machine embodies a principled way of dealing with
the exploration vs exploitation problem [20]. Note that the expected utility (equation (1))
of conducting some experiment may exceed the one of not condu cting it, even when the
experimental outcome later suggests to keep acting in line with the previous e.
3. The G¨ odel machine might also modify its very axioms to speed things up. For example, it
might ﬁnd a proof that the original axioms should be replaced or augmented by theorems
derivable from the original axioms.
4. The G¨ odel machine might even change its own utility function and target theorem, but can
do so only if their new values are provably better according to the old ones.
5. In many cases we do not expect the G¨ odel machine to replaceits proof searcher by code that
completely abandons the search for proofs. Instead we expec t that only certain subroutines
of the proof searcher will be sped up—compare the example in S ection 4.4—or that perhaps
just the order of generated proofs will be modiﬁed in problem -speciﬁc fashion. This could
be done by modifying the probability distribution on the proof techniques of the initial bias-
optimal proof searcher from Section 5.
6. Generally speaking, the utility of limited rewrites may often be easier to prove than the one of
total rewrites. For example, suppose it is 8.00pm and our G¨ odel machine-controlled agent’s
permanent goal is to maximize future expected reward, usingthe (alternative) target theorem
(3). Part thereof is to avoid hunger. There is nothing in its f ridge, and shops close down at
8.30pm. It does not have time to optimize its way to the superm arket in every little detail,
but if it does not get going right now it will stay hungry tonight (in principle such near-future
consequences of actions should be easily provable, possibl y even in a way related to how
humans prove advantages of potential actions to themselves). That is, if the agent’s previous
policy did not already include, say, an automatic daily even ing trip to the supermarket, the
policy provably should be rewritten at least in a very limited and simple way right now, while
there is still time, such that the agent will surely get some food tonight, without affecting less
urgent future behavior that can be optimized / decided later , such as details of the route to
the food, or of tomorrow’s actions.
7. In certain uninteresting environments reward is maximiz ed by becoming dumb. For exam-
ple, a given task may require to repeatedly and forever execu te the same pleasure center-
activating action, as quickly as possible. In such cases the G¨ odel machine may delete most
of its more time-consuming initial software including the proof searcher.
8. Note that there is no reason why a G¨ odel machine should not augment its own hardware.
Suppose its lifetime is known to be 100 years. Given a hard problem and axioms restricting
the possible behaviors of the environment, the G¨ odel machi ne might ﬁnd a proof that its
expected cumulative reward will increase if it invests 10 years into building faster computa-
tional hardware, by exploiting the physical resources of its environment.
16
6.2 Example Applications
Traditional examples that do not involve signiﬁcant intera ction with a probabilistic environment
are easily dealt with in our reward-based framework:
Example 6.1 (Time-limited NP-hard optimization) The initial input to the G ¨odel machine is the
representation of a connected graph with a large number of no des linked by edges of various
lengths. Within given time T it should ﬁnd a cyclic path connecting all nodes. The only rea l-
valued reward will occur at time T . It equals 1 divided by the length of the best path found so far
(0 if none was found). There are no other inputs. The by-produ ct of maximizing expected reward
is to ﬁnd the shortest path ﬁndable within the limited time, g iven the initial bias.
Example 6.2 (Fast theorem proving) Prove or disprove as quickly as possible that all even inte-
gers > 2 are the sum of two primes (Goldbach’s conjecture). The rewar d is 1/t, where t is the time
required to produce and verify the ﬁrst such proof.
More general cases are:
Example 6.3 (Maximizing expected reward with bounded resou rces) A robot that needs at least
1 liter of gasoline per hour interacts with a partially unkno wn environment, trying to ﬁnd hidden,
limited gasoline depots to occasionally refuel its tank. It is rewarded in proportion to its life-
time, and dies after at most 100 years or as soon as its tank is e mpty or it falls off a cliff etc.
The probabilistic environmental reactions are initially u nknown but assumed to be sampled from
the axiomatized Speed Prior [43], according to which hard-t o-compute environmental reactions
are unlikely. This permits a computable strategy for making near-optimal predictions [43]. One
by-product of maximizing expected reward is to maximize exp ected lifetime.
Example 6.4 (Optimize any suboptimal problem solver) Given any formalizable problem, im-
plement a suboptimal but known problem solver as software on the G ¨odel machine hardware, and
let the proof searcher of Section 5 run in parallel.
6.3 Probabilistic G ¨odel Machine Hardware
Above we have focused on an example deterministic machine li ving in a possibly probabilistic
environment. It is straight-forward to extend this to compu ters whose actions are computed in
probabilistic fashion, given the current state. Then the ex pectation calculus used for probabilistic
aspects of the environment simply has to be extended to the ha rdware itself, and the mechanism
for verifying proofs has to take into account that there is no such thing as a certain theorem—at
best there are formal statements which are true with such and such probability. In fact, this may
be the most realistic approach as any physical hardware is error-prone, which should be taken into
account by realistic probabilistic G¨ odel machines.
Probabilistic settings also automatically avoid certain i ssues of axiomatic consistency. For
example, predictions proven to come true with probability l ess than 1.0 do not necessarily cause
contradictions even when they do not match the observations.
17
6.4 Relations to Previous Work
Despite (or maybe because of) the ambitiousness and potential power of self-improving machines,
there has been little work in this vein outside our own labs at IDSIA and TU M¨ unchen. Here we
will list essential differences between the G¨ odel machineand our previous approaches to ‘learning
to learn,’ ‘metalearning,’ self-improvement, self-optimization, etc.
The most closely related approaches are Hutter’s HSEARCH and AIXI (t,l) (Item 3 below). For
historical reasons, however, we will ﬁrst discuss Levin’sUniversal Search and Hutter’s AIXI.
1. G¨odel Machine vs Universal Search
Unlike the fully self-referential G¨ odel machine, Levin’s Universal Search [24, 26] has a
hardwired, unmodiﬁable meta-algorithm that cannot improve itself. It is asymptotically op-
timal for inversion problems whose solutions can be quickly veriﬁed in O(n) time (where
n is the solution size), but it will always suffer from the same huge constant slowdown fac-
tors (typically >> 101000) buried in the O()-notation. The self-improvements of a G¨ odel
machine, however, can be more than merely O()-optimal, since its utility function may for-
malize a stonger type of optimality that does not ignore huge constants just because they are
constant—compare the utility function of equation (1).
Furthermore, the G¨ odel machine is applicable to general li felong reinforcement learning
(RL) tasks [20] where Universal Search is not asymptotically optimal, and not even applica-
ble, since in RL the evaluation of some behavior’s value in principle consumes the learner’s
entire life! So the naive test of whether a program is good or n ot would consume the entire
life. That is, we could test only one program; afterwards life would be over.
Therefore, to achieve their objective, general RL machines must do things that Universal
Search does not do, such as predicting future tasks and rewards. This partly motivates Hut-
ter’s universal RL machine AIXI, to be discussed next.
2. G¨odel Machine vs AIXI
Unlike G¨ odel machines, Hutter’s recent AIXI model [16, 19] generally needs unlimited com-
putational resources per input update. It combines Solomonoff’s universal prediction scheme
[57, 58] with an expectimax computation. In discrete cycle k = 1 , 2, 3, . . ., action y(k) re-
sults in perception x(k) and reward r(k), both sampled from the unknown (reactive) envi-
ronmental probability distribution µ. A IXI deﬁnes a mixture distribution ξ as a weighted
sum of distributions ν ∈ M, where M is any class of distributions that includes the true en-
vironment µ. For example, M may be a sum of all computable distributions [57, 58], where
the sum of the weights does not exceed 1. In cycle k + 1, A IXI selects as next action the
ﬁrst in an action sequence maximizing ξ-predicted reward up to some given horizon. Recent
work [18] demonstrated AIXI ’s optimal use of observations as follows. The Bayes-optimal
policy pξ based on the mixture ξ is self-optimizing in the sense that its average utility value
converges asymptotically for all µ ∈ M to the optimal value achieved by the (infeasible)
Bayes-optimal policy pµ which knows µ in advance. The necessary condition that M admits
self-optimizing policies is also sufﬁcient. Furthermore, pξ is Pareto-optimal in the sense that
18
there is no other policy yielding higher or equal value in all environments ν ∈ M and a
strictly higher value in at least one [18].
While A IXI clariﬁes certain theoretical limits of machine learning, i t is computationally
intractable, especially when M includes all computable distributions. This drawback mo-
tivated work on the time-bounded, asymptotically optimal A IXI (t,l) system [16] and the
related HSEARCH [17], both to be discussed next.
3. G¨odel Machine vs HSEARCH and AIXI (t,l)
Now we come to the most closely related previous work; so we wi ll go an extra length to
point out the main novelties of the G¨ odel machine.
Hutter’s non-self-referential but still O()-optimal ‘fastest’ algorithm for all well-deﬁned
problems HSEARCH [17] uses a hardwired brute force proof searcher and ignores the costs
of proof search. Assume discrete input/output domains X/Y , a formal problem speciﬁca-
tion f : X → Y (say, a functional description of how integers are decompos ed into their
prime factors), and a particularx ∈ X (say, an integer to be factorized). HSEARCH orders all
proofs of an appropriate axiomatic system by size to ﬁnd programs q that for all z ∈ X prov-
ably compute f (z) within time bound tq(z). Simultaneously it spends most of its time on
executing the q with the best currently proven time bound tq(x). It turns out that H SEARCH
is as fast as the fastest algorithm that provably computes f (z) for all z ∈ X, save for a con-
stant factor smaller than 1 + ǫ (arbitrary ǫ > 0) and an f-speciﬁc but x-independent additive
constant [17]. This constant may be enormous though.
Hutter’s AIXI (t,l) [16] is related. In discrete cycle k = 1 , 2, 3, . . . of A IXI (t,l)’s lifetime,
action y(k) results in perception x(k) and reward r(k), where all quantities may depend on
the complete history. Using a universal computer such as a Turing machine, AIXI (t,l) needs
an initial ofﬂine setup phase (prior to interaction with theenvironment) where it uses a hard-
wired brute force proof searcher to examine all proofs of length atmost L, ﬁltering out those
that identify programs (of maximal size l and maximal runtime t per cycle) which not only
could interact with the environment but which for all possible interaction histories also cor-
rectly predict a lower bound of their own expected future rew ard. In cycle k, AIXI (t,l) then
runs all programs identiﬁed in the setup phase (at most 2l), ﬁnds the one with highest self-
rating, and executes its corresponding action. The problem -independent setup time (where
almost all of the work is done) is O(L · 2L). The online time per cycle is O(t · 2l). Both are
constant but typically huge.
Advantages and Novelty of the G ¨odel Machine. There are major differences between the
G¨ odel machine and Hutter’s HSEARCH [17] and AIXI (t,l) [16], including:
(a) The theorem provers of H SEARCH and A IXI (t,l) are hardwired, non-self-referential,
unmodiﬁable meta-algorithms that cannot improve themselv es. That is, they will al-
ways suffer from the same huge constant slowdowns (typically ≫ 101000) buried in the
O()-notation. But there is nothing in principle that prevents t he truly self-referential
code of a G¨ odel machine from proving and exploiting drasticreductions of such con-
stants, in the best possible way that provably constitutes a n improvement, if there is
any.
19
(b) The demonstration of the O()-optimality of H SEARCH and A IXI (t,l) depends on a
clever allocation of computation time to some of their unmod iﬁable meta-algorithms.
Our Global Optimality Theorem (Theorem 4.1, Section 4), however, is justiﬁed through
a quite different type of reasoning which indeed exploits an d crucially depends on the
fact that there is no unmodiﬁable software at all, and that th e proof searcher itself
is readable, modiﬁable, and can be improved. This is also the reason why its self-
improvements can be more than merely O()-optimal.
(c) H SEARCH uses a “trick” of proving more than is necessary which also di sappears in
the sometimes quite misleading O()-notation: it wastes time on ﬁnding programs that
provably compute f (z) for all z ∈ X even when the current f (x)(x ∈ X) is the only
object of interest. A G¨ odel machine, however, needs to prove only what is relevant to
its goal formalized by u. For example, the general u of eq. (1) completely ignores the
limited concept of O()-optimality, but instead formalizes a stronger type of optimality
that does not ignore huge constants just because they are constant.
(d) Both the G¨ odel machine and AIXI (t,l) can maximize expected reward (HSEARCH can-
not). But the G¨ odel machine is more ﬂexible as we may plug in any type of formaliz-
able utility function (e.g., worst case reward), and unlike A IXI (t,l) it does not require
an enumerable environmental distribution.
Nevertheless, we may use A IXI (t,l) or HSEARCH or other less general methods to initialize
the substring e of p which is responsible for interaction with the environment. The G¨ odel
machine will replace e(1) as soon as it ﬁnds a provably better strategy.
It is the self-referential aspects of the G¨ odel machine that relieve us of much of the burden
of careful algorithm design required for AIXI (t,l) and HSEARCH . They make the G¨ odel ma-
chine both conceptually simpler and more general.
4. G¨odel Machine vs OOPS
The Optimal Ordered Problem Solver OOPS [48, 44] (used by BIOPS in Section 5.2) extends
Universal Search (Item 1). It is a bias-optimal (see Def. 5.1) way of searching for a pro-
gram that solves each problem in an ordered sequence of probl ems of a rather general type,
continually organizing and managing and reusing earlier ac quired knowledge. Solomonoff
recently also proposed related ideas for a scientist’s assistant [59] that modiﬁes the proba-
bility distribution of Universal Search [24] based on experience.
Like Universal Search (Item 1), O OPS is not directly applicable to RL problems. A prov-
ably optimal RL machine must somehowprove properties of otherwise un-testable behaviors
(such as: what is the expected reward of this behavior which one cannot naively test as there
is not enough time). That is part of what the G¨ odel machine do es: it tries to greatly cut
testing time, replacing naive time-consuming tests by much faster proofs of predictable test
outcomes whenever this is possible.
Proof veriﬁcation itself can be performed very quickly. In p articular, verifying the cor-
rectness of a found proof typically does not consume the rema ining life. Hence the G¨ odel
machine may use O OPS as a bias-optimal proof-searching submodule (Section 5.2) . Since
20
the proofs themselves may concern quite different, arbitrary notions of optimality (not just
bias-optimality), the G¨ odel machine is more general than plain O OPS. But it is not just an
extension of O OPS. Instead of O OPS it may as well use non-bias-optimal alternative meth-
ods to initialize its proof searcher. On the other hand, O OPS is not just a precursor of the
G¨ odel machine. It is a stand-alone, incremental, bias-optimal way of allocating runtime to
programs that reuse previously successful programs, and is applicable to many traditional
problems, including but not limited to proof search.
5. G¨odel Machine vs Success-Story Algorithm and Other Metalear ners
A learner’s modiﬁable components are called its policy. An algorithm that modiﬁes the pol-
icy is a learning algorithm. If the learning algorithm has modiﬁable components represented
as part of the policy, then we speak of a self-modifying policy (SMP) [53]. SMPs can modify
the way they modify themselves etc. The G¨ odel machine has anSMP.
In previous practical work we used thesuccess-story algorithm (SSA) to force some (stochas-
tic) SMP to trigger better and better self-modiﬁcations [37, 54, 53, 55]. During the learner’s
life-time, SSA is occasionally called at times computed acc ording to SMP itself. SSA uses
backtracking to undo those SMP-generated SMP-modiﬁcation s that have not been empiri-
cally observed to trigger lifelong reward accelerations (m easured up until the current SSA
call—this evaluates the long-term effects of SMP-modiﬁcat ions setting the stage for later
SMP-modiﬁcations). SMP-modiﬁcations that survive SSA rep resent a lifelong success his-
tory. Until the next SSA call, they build the basis for additi onal SMP-modiﬁcations. Solely
by self-modiﬁcations our SMP/SSA-based learners solved a c omplex task in a partially ob-
servable environment whose state space is far bigger than most found in the literature [53].
The G¨ odel machine’s training algorithm is theoretically m uch more powerful than SSA
though. SSA empirically measures the usefulness of previou s self-modiﬁcations, and does
not necessarily encourage provably optimal ones. Similar drawbacks hold for Lenat’s human-
assisted, non-autonomous, self-modifying learner [23], our Meta-Genetic Programming [34]
extending Cramer’s Genetic Programming [8, 1], our metalearning economies [34] extend-
ing Holland’s machine learning economies [15], and gradient-based metalearners for contin-
uous program spaces of differentiable recurrent neural networks [36, 13]. All these methods,
however, could be used to seed p(1) with an initial policy.
6.5 Are Humans Probabilistic G ¨odel Machines?
We do not know. We think they better be. Their initial underlying formal system for dealing with
uncertainty seems to differ substantially from those of tra ditional expectation calculus and logic
though—compare Items 1c and 1d in Section 3.2 as well as the su permarket example (Item 6 in
Section 6.1).
21
6.6 G ¨odel Machines and Consciousness
In recent years the topic of consciousness has gained some credibility as a serious research issue, at
least in philosophy and neuroscience, e.g., [9]. However, t here is a lack of technical justiﬁcations
of consciousness: so far nobody has shown that consciousness is really useful for solving problems,
although problem solving is considered of central importance in philosophy [31].
The fully self-referential G¨ odel machine may be viewed as p roviding just such a technical
justiﬁcation [50]. It is “conscious” or “self-aware” in the sense that its entire behavior is open to
self-introspection, and modiﬁable. It may ‘step outside of itself’ [14] by executing self-changes
that are provably good, where the proof searcher itself is su bject to analysis and change through
the proof techniques it tests. And this type of total self-re ference is precisely the reason for its
optimality as a problem solver, in the sense of Theorem 4.1.
6.7 Frequently Asked Questions
In the past year the author frequently ﬁelded questions abou t the G¨ odel machine. Here a list of
answers to typical ones.
1. Q: Does the exact business of formal proof search really make se nse in the uncertain real
world?
A: Yes, it does. We just need to insert into p(1) the standard axioms for representing uncer-
tainty and for dealing with probabilistic settings and expe cted rewards etc. Compare items
1d and 1c in Section 3.2, and the deﬁnition of utility as an expected value in equation (1).
Also note that the machine learning literature is full ofhuman-generated proofs of properties
of methods for dealing with stochastic environments.
2. Q: The target theorem (2) seems to refer only to the very ﬁrst self-change, which may com-
pletely rewrite the proof-search subroutine—doesn’t this make the proof of Theorem 4.1 in-
valid? What prevents later self-changes from being destruc tive?
A: This is fully taken care of. Please have a look once more at theproof of Theorem 4.1, and
note that the ﬁrst self-change will be executed only if it is provably useful (in the sense of the
present untility function u) for all future self-changes (for which the present self-ch ange is
setting the stage). This is actually one of the main points ofthe whole self-referential set-up.
3. Q (related to the previous item): The G ¨odel machine implements a meta-learning behavior:
what about a meta-meta, and a meta-meta-meta level?
A: The beautiful thing is that all meta-levels are automatically collapsed into one: any proof
of a target theorem automatically proves that the corresponding self-modiﬁcation is good for
all further self-modiﬁcations affected by the present one,in recursive fashion. Recall Section
4.3.
4. Q: The G ¨odel machine software can produce only computable mappings from input se-
quences to output sequences. What if the environment is non- computable?
22
A: Many physicists and other scientists (exceptions: [63, 39] ) actually seem to assume the
real world makes use of all the real numbers, most of which areincomputable. Nevertheless,
theorems and proofs are just ﬁnite symbol strings, and all tr eatises of physics contain only
computable axioms and theorems, even when some of the theore ms can be interpreted as
making statements about uncountably many objects, such as a ll the real numbers. (Note
though that the L¨ owenheim-Skolem Theorem [28, 56] implies that any ﬁrst order theory
with an uncountable model such as the real numbers also has a countable model.) Generally
speaking, formal descriptions of non-computable objects do not at all present a fundamental
problem—they may still allow for ﬁnding a strategy that prov ably maximizes utility. If so, a
G¨ odel machine can exploit this. If not, then humans will nothave a fundamental advantage
over G¨ odel machines.
5. Q: Isn’t automated theorem-proving very hard? Current AI syst ems cannot prove nontrivial
theorems without human intervention at crucial decision po ints.
A: More and more important mathematical proofs (four color the orem etc) heavily depend
on automated proof search. And traditional theorem provers do not even make use of our
novel notions of proof techniques and O()-optimal proof search. Of course, some proofs
are indeed hard to ﬁnd, but here humans and G¨ odel machines fa ce the same fundamental
limitations.
6. Q: Don’t the “no free lunch theorems” [62] say that it is impossi ble to construct universal
problem solvers?
A: No, they do not. They refer to the very special case of problem s sampled from i.i.d.
uniform distributions on ﬁnite problem spaces. See the discussion of no free lunch theorems
in an earlier paper [48].
7. Q: Can’t the G ¨odel machine switch to a program switchprog that rewrites the utility function
to a “bogus” utility function that makes unfounded promises of big rewards in the near
future?
A: No, it cannot. It should be obvious that rewrites of the utili ty function can happen only
if the G¨ odel machine ﬁrst can prove that the rewrite is useful according to the present utility
function.
8. Q: Aren’t there problems with undecidability? F or example, do esn’t Rice’s theorem [32] or
Blum’s speed-up theorem [3, 4] pose problems?
A: Not at all. Of course, the G¨ odel machine cannot proﬁt from a h ypothetical useful self-
improvement whose utility is undecidable, and will therefo re simply ignore it. Compare
Section 2.4 on fundamental limitations of G¨ odel machines ( and humans, for that matter).
Nevertheless, unlike previous methods, a G¨ odel machine can in principle exploit at least the
provably good improvements and speed-ups of any part of its initial software.
23
7 Conclusion
In 1931, Kurt G¨ odel laid the foundations of theoretical computer science, using elementary arith-
metics to build a universal programming language for encoding arbitrary proofs, given an arbitrary
enumerable set of axioms. He went on to construct self-referential formal statements that claim
their own unprovability, using Cantor’s diagonalization trick [5] to demonstrate that formal sys-
tems such as traditional mathematics are either ﬂawed in a certain sense or contain unprovable but
true statements [11]. Since G¨ odel’s exhibition of the fundamental limits of proof and computation,
and Konrad Zuse’s subsequent construction of the ﬁrst worki ng programmable computer (1935-
1941), there has been a lot of work on specialized algorithmssolving problems taken from more or
less general problem classes. Apparently, however, one remarkable fact has so far escaped the at-
tention of computer scientists: it is possible to use self-referential proof systems to build optimally
efﬁcient yet conceptually very simple universal problem solvers.
The initial software p(1) of our G¨ odel machine runs an initial, typically sub-optimal problem
solver, e.g., one of Hutter’s approaches [16, 17] which haveat least an optimalorder of complexity,
or some less general method [20]. Simultaneously, it runs an O()-optimal initial proof searcher
using an online variant of Universal Search to test proof techniques, which are programs able to
compute proofs concerning the system’s own future performance, based on an axiomatic systemA
encoded in p(1), describing a formal utility function u, the hardware and p(1) itself. If there is no
provably good, globally optimal way of rewriting p(1) at all, then humans will not ﬁnd one either.
But if there is one, then p(1) itself can ﬁnd and exploit it. This approach yields the ﬁrst c lass of
theoretically sound, fully self-referential, optimally efﬁcient, general problem solvers.
After the theoretical discussion in Sections 1-5, one pract ical question remains: to build a
particular, especially practical G¨ odel machine with small initial constant overhead, which generally
useful theorems should one add as axioms to A (as initial bias) such that the initial searcher does
not have to prove them from scratch?
8 Acknowledgments
Thanks to Alexey Chernov, Marcus Hutter, Jan Poland, Ray Solomonoff, Sepp Hochreiter, Shane
Legg, Leonid Levin, Alex Graves, Matteo Gagliolo, Viktor Zhumatiy, Ben Goertzel, Will Pearson,
and Faustino Gomez, for useful comments on drafts or summaries or earlier versions of this paper. I
am also grateful to many others who asked questions during G¨odel machine talks or sent comments
by email. Their input helped to shape Section 6.7 on frequently asked questions.
24
References
[1] W. Banzhaf, P. Nordin, R. E. Keller, and F. D. Francone. Genetic Programming – An Intro-
duction. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, CA, USA, 1998.
[2] R. Bellman. Adaptive Control Processes. Princeton University Press, 1961.
[3] M. Blum. A machine-independent theory of the complexity of recursive functions. Journal
of the ACM, 14(2):322–336, 1967.
[4] M. Blum. On effective procedures for speeding up algorit hms. Journal of the ACM ,
18(2):290–305, 1971.
[5] G. Cantor. ¨Uber eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffes aller reellen algebraischen Zahlen. Crelle’s
Journal f ¨ur Mathematik, 77:258–263, 1874.
[6] G. J. Chaitin. A theory of program size formally identica l to information theory. Journal of
the ACM, 22:329–340, 1975.
[7] W. F. Clocksin and C. S. Mellish. Programming in Prolog (3rd ed.). Springer-Verlag, 1987.
[8] N. L. Cramer. A representation for the adaptive generation of simple sequential programs. In
J.J. Grefenstette, editor, Proceedings of an International Conference on Genetic Algo rithms
and Their Applications, Carnegie-Mellon University, July 24-26, 1985 , Hillsdale NJ, 1985.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
[9] F. Crick and C. Koch. Consciousness and neuroscience. Cerebral Cortex, 8:97–107, 1998.
[10] M. C. Fitting. First-Order Logic and Automated Theorem Proving . Graduate Texts in Com-
puter Science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2nd edition, 1996.
[11] K. G¨ odel. ¨Uber formal unentscheidbare S¨ atze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter
Systeme I. Monatshefte f ¨ur Mathematik und Physik , 38:173–198, 1931.
[12] W. Heisenberg. ¨Uber den anschaulichen Inhalt der quantentheoretischen Ki nematik und
Mechanik. Zeitschrift f ¨ur Physik, 33:879–893, 1925.
[13] S. Hochreiter, A. S. Younger, and P. R. Conwell. Learning to learn using gradient descent. In
Lecture Notes on Comp. Sci. 2130, Proc. Intl. Conf. on Artiﬁc ial Neural Networks (ICANN-
2001), pages 87–94. Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001.
[14] D. R. Hofstadter. G¨odel, Escher , Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid. Basic Books, 1979.
[15] J. H. Holland. Properties of the bucket brigade. In Proceedings of an International Confer-
ence on Genetic Algorithms . Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1985.
[16] M. Hutter. Towards a universal theory of artiﬁcial inte lligence based on algorithmic proba-
bility and sequential decisions. Proceedings of the 12 th European Conference on Machine
Learning (ECML-2001), pages 226–238, 2001. (On J. Schmidhuber’s SNF grant 20-61847).
25
[17] M. Hutter. The fastest and shortest algorithm for all we ll-deﬁned problems. International
Journal of F oundations of Computer Science , 13(3):431–443, 2002. (On J. Schmidhuber’s
SNF grant 20-61847).
[18] M. Hutter. Self-optimizing and Pareto-optimal polici es in general environments based on
Bayes-mixtures. In J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual
Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002) , Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 364–379, Sydney, Australia, 2002. Springer. (On J. Schmidhuber’s SNF
grant 20-61847).
[19] M. Hutter. Universal Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Sequential Decisions b ased on Algorithmic
Probability. Springer, Berlin, 2004. (On J. Schmidhuber’s SNF grant 20-61847).
[20] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. W. Moore. Reinforcement learning: a survey. Journal
of AI research, 4:237–285, 1996.
[21] A. N. Kolmogorov. Grundbegriffe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung. Springer, Berlin, 1933.
[22] A. N. Kolmogorov. Three approaches to the quantitative deﬁnition of information. Problems
of Information Transmission, 1:1–11, 1965.
[23] D. Lenat. Theory formation by heuristic search. Machine Learning, 21, 1983.
[24] L. A. Levin. Universal sequential search problems. Problems of Information Transmission ,
9(3):265–266, 1973.
[25] L. A. Levin. Laws of information (nongrowth) and aspect s of the foundation of probability
theory. Problems of Information Transmission, 10(3):206–210, 1974.
[26] L. A. Levin. Randomness conservation inequalities: In formation and independence in math-
ematical theories. Information and Control, 61:15–37, 1984.
[27] M. Li and P. M. B. Vit´ anyi.An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and its Applicati ons
(2nd edition). Springer, 1997.
[28] L. L¨ owenheim.¨Uber M¨ oglichkeiten im Relativkalk¨ ul.Mathematische Annalen, 76:447–470,
1915.
[29] C. H. Moore and G. C. Leach. FORTH - a language for interac tive computing, 1970.
[30] R. Penrose. Shadows of the mind . Oxford University Press, 1994.
[31] K. R. Popper. All Life Is Problem Solving . Routledge, London, 1999.
[32] H. G. Rice. Classes of recursively enumerable sets and their decision problems. Trans. Amer .
Math. Soc., 74:358–366, 1953.
[33] A. L. Samuel. Some studies in machine learning using the game of checkers. IBM Journal
on Research and Development, 3:210–229, 1959.
26
[34] J. Schmidhuber. Evolutionary principles in self-refe rential learning. Diploma thesis, Institut
f¨ ur Informatik, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen, 1987.
[35] J. Schmidhuber. Reinforcement learning in Markovian a nd non-Markovian environments. In
D. S. Lippman, J. E. Moody, and D. S. Touretzky, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 3 (NIPS 3) , pages 500–506. Morgan Kaufmann, 1991.
[36] J. Schmidhuber. A self-referential weight matrix. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, Amsterdam , pages 446–451. Springer, 1993.
[37] J. Schmidhuber. On learning how to learn learning strat egies. Technical Report FKI-198-94,
Fakult¨ at f¨ ur Informatik, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen, 1994. See [55, 53].
[38] J. Schmidhuber. Discovering solutions with low Kolmog orov complexity and high general-
ization capability. In A. Prieditis and S. Russell, editors , Machine Learning: Proceedings
of the Twelfth International Conference , pages 488–496. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San
Francisco, CA, 1995.
[39] J. Schmidhuber. A computer scientist’s view of life, th e universe, and everything. In
C. Freksa, M. Jantzen, and R. Valk, editors, F oundations of Computer Science: Potential
- Theory - Cognition , volume 1337, pages 201–208. Lecture Notes in Computer Scie nce,
Springer, Berlin, 1997.
[40] J. Schmidhuber. Discovering neural nets with low Kolmo gorov complexity and high gener-
alization capability. Neural Networks, 10(5):857–873, 1997.
[41] J. Schmidhuber. Algorithmic theories of everything. T echnical Report IDSIA-20-00, quant-
ph/0011122, IDSIA, Manno (Lugano), Switzerland, 2000. Sections 1-5: see [42]; Section 6:
see [43].
[42] J. Schmidhuber. Hierarchies of generalized Kolmogoro v complexities and nonenumerable
universal measures computable in the limit. International Journal of F oundations of Com-
puter Science, 13(4):587–612, 2002.
[43] J. Schmidhuber. The Speed Prior: a new simplicity measu re yielding near-optimal com-
putable predictions. In J. Kivinen and R. H. Sloan, editors, Proceedings of the 15th Annual
Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT 2002) , Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, pages 216–228. Springer, Sydney, Australia, 2002.
[44] J. Schmidhuber. Bias-optimal incremental problem sol ving. In S. Becker, S. Thrun, and
K. Obermayer, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 15 (NIPS 15),
pages 1571–1578, Cambridge, MA, 2003. MIT Press.
[45] J. Schmidhuber. G¨ odel machines: self-referential universal problem solvers making provably
optimal self-improvements. Technical Report IDSIA-19-03 , arXiv:cs.LO/0309048, IDSIA,
Manno-Lugano, Switzerland, 2003.
27
[46] J. Schmidhuber. Towards solving the grand problem of AI . In P. Quaresma, A. Dourado,
E. Costa, and J. F. Costa, editors, Soft Computing and complex systems , pages 77–97. Centro
Internacional de Mathematica, Coimbra, Portugal, 2003. Based on [52].
[47] J. Schmidhuber. G¨ odel machine home page, with frequen tly asked questions, 2004.
http://www.idsia.ch/˜juergen/goedelmachine.html.
[48] J. Schmidhuber. Optimal ordered problem solver. Machine Learning, 54:211–254, 2004.
[49] J. Schmidhuber. Completely self-referential optimal reinforcement learners. In W. Duch,
J. Kacprzyk, E. Oja, and S. Zadrozny, editors, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks: Biological In-
spirations - ICANN 2005, LNCS 3697 , pages 223–233. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg,
2005. Plenary talk.
[50] J. Schmidhuber. G¨ odel machines: Towards a technical j ustiﬁcation of consciousness. In
D. Kudenko, D. Kazakov, and E. Alonso, editors, Adaptive Agents and Multi-Agent Systems
III (LNCS 3394), pages 1–23. Springer Verlag, 2005.
[51] J. Schmidhuber. G¨ odel machines: fully self-referent ial optimal universal problem solvers.
In B. Goertzel and C. Pennachin, editors, Artiﬁcial General Intelligence . Springer Verlag, in
press, 2006.
[52] J. Schmidhuber. The new AI: General & sound & relevant fo r physics. In B. Goertzel and
C. Pennachin, editors, Artiﬁcial General Intelligence . Springer, in press, 2006. Also available
as TR IDSIA-04-03, cs.AI/0302012.
[53] J. Schmidhuber, J. Zhao, and N. Schraudolph. Reinforce ment learning with self-modifying
policies. In S. Thrun and L. Pratt, editors, Learning to learn, pages 293–309. Kluwer, 1997.
[54] J. Schmidhuber, J. Zhao, and M. Wiering. Simple princip les of metalearning. Technical
Report IDSIA-69-96, IDSIA, 1996. See [55, 53].
[55] J. Schmidhuber, J. Zhao, and M. Wiering. Shifting induc tive bias with success-story algo-
rithm, adaptive Levin search, and incremental self-improvement. Machine Learning, 28:105–
130, 1997.
[56] T. Skolem. Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen ¨uber Erf¨ ullbarkeit oder Beweisbarkeit
mathematischer S¨ atze nebst einem Theorem ¨ uber dichte Mengen. Skrifter utgit av Viden-
skapsselskapet in Kristiania, I, Mat.-Nat. Kl. , N4:1–36, 1919.
[57] R. J. Solomonoff. A formal theory of inductive inferenc e. Part I. Information and Control ,
7:1–22, 1964.
[58] R. J. Solomonoff. Complexity-based induction systems . IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, IT-24(5):422–432, 1978.
[59] R. J. Solomonoff. Progress in incremental machine lear ning—Preliminary Report for NIPS
2002 Workshop on Universal Learners and Optimal Search; rev ised Sept 2003. Technical
Report IDSIA-16-03, IDSIA, Lugano, 2003.
28
[60] R. Sutton and A. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction . Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press, 1998.
[61] A. M. Turing. On computable numbers, with an applicatio n to the Entscheidungsproblem.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society, Series 2 , 41:230–267, 1936.
[62] D. H. Wolpert and W. G. Macready. No free lunch theorems f or search. IEEE Transactions
on Evolutionary Computation, 1, 1997.
[63] K. Zuse. Rechnender Raum. Friedrich Vieweg & Sohn, Braunschweig, 1969. English tran s-
lation: Calculating Space, MIT Technical Translation AZT-70-164-GEMIT, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (Proj. MAC), Cambridge, Mass. 02139, Feb. 1970.
29