No More Stale Feedback:
Co-Evolving Critics for Open-World Agent Learning
Zhicong Li1,2*, Lingjie Jiang3*, Yulan Hu2, Xingchen Zeng4,
Yixia Li5, Xiangwen Zhang2, Guanhua Chen5,
Zheng Pan 2, Xin Li2, Yong Liu1†
1Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China,
2Amap, Alibaba Group, 3Peking University,
4The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou),
5Southern University of Science and Technology
{zhicongli, liuyonggsai}@ruc.edu.cn, lingjiejiang@stu.pku.edu.cn
{huyulan, zhangxiangwen.zxw, panzheng.pan, beilai.bl}@alibaba-inc.com
xzeng159@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, liyixia@me.com, ghchen08@gmail.com
Abstract
Critique-guided reinforcement learning (RL)
has emerged as a powerful paradigm for train-
ing LLM agents by augmenting sparse outcome
rewards with natural-language feedback. How-
ever, current methods often rely on static or
offline critic models, which fail to adapt as the
policy evolves. In on-policy RL, the agent’s er-
ror patterns shift over time, causing stationary
critics to become stale and providing feedback
of diminishing utility. To address this, we in-
troduce ECHO (Evolving Critic for Hindsight-
Guided Optimization), a framework that jointly
optimizes the policy and critic through a syn-
chronized co-evolutionary loop. ECHO utilizes
a cascaded rollout mechanism where the critic
generates multiple diagnoses for an initial tra-
jectory, followed by policy refinement to enable
group-structured advantage estimation. We ad-
dress the challenge of learning plateaus via a
saturation-aware gain shaping objective, which
rewards the critic for inducing incremental im-
provements in high-performing trajectories. By
employing dual-track GRPO updates, ECHO
ensures the critic’s feedback stays synchronized
with the evolving policy. Experimental results
show that ECHO yields more stable training
and higher long-horizon task success across
open-world environments.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (Sutton et al., 1998) has
emerged as a promising paradigm for training
Large Language Model (LLM)-based agents (An-
thropic, 2024; Team et al., 2025), enabling them
to navigate complex tasks through environmental
interactions. Within this paradigm, reward sig-
nals (Wen et al., 2025) serve as the fundamental
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
compass for policy optimization. However, these
signals often lack actionability, as they merely re-
flect the final outcome without providing the di-
agnostic insights necessary for effective refine-
ment, ultimately leading to significant data inef-
ficiency (Gao et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b).
To bridge this gap, recent research has intro-
duced linguistic critics to provide diagnostic feed-
back (Dhuliawala et al., 2024). A common line of
work uses template-based critiques (Wang et al.,
2025; Liu et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025), which
are computationally inexpensive but lack the adapt-
ability to deliver feedback tailored to the agent’s
specific actions. To provide more targeted guid-
ance, another line of work employs independently
fine-tuned, separate critic models to refine policy
outputs (McAleese et al., 2024). These models are
typically designed to act as external supervisors,
aiming to provide the diagnostic feedback neces-
sary to resolve complex failures.
Although these methods overcome the limita-
tions of static templates by offering more detailed
feedback, they remain decoupled from the policy’s
learning process, implicitly assuming that the opti-
mal critique strategy is stationary. In on-policy RL,
however, the policy continuously evolves, inducing
a shifting trajectory distribution and a correspond-
ing drift in failure patterns: early-stage rollouts
may be dominated by coarse mistakes that bene-
fit from high-level hints, whereas later-stage poli-
cies are more often bottlenecked by subtle, hard-
to-localize defects. Consequently, a critic trained
(and then frozen) on an earlier distribution can be-
come stale, producing feedback that is redundant,
miscalibrated in granularity, or even misleading for
the current policy, and causing its marginal utility
to decay as training progresses. This critic stale-
arXiv:2601.06794v2  [cs.AI]  14 Apr 2026

ness fundamentally limits sample efficiency and
prevents critique-guided RL from sustaining im-
provement in long-horizon refinement.
Motivated by this observation, we posit that the
critic should be treated as a co-evolving module
rather than a stationary supervisor, adapting along-
side the policy (Figure 1). Concretely, we pro-
pose ECHO (Evolving Critic for Hindsight-Guided
Optimization), a framework that fosters a symbi-
otic optimization loop between the policy and the
critic. Instead of rewarding the critic for sound-
ing plausible, we directly optimize it for policy
improvement: critiques are evaluated by the per-
formance gains they induce after refinement, and
the critic is updated in lockstep with the policy
to track its changing failure modes. To make this
co-evolution stable and sample-efficient, ECHO
employs a cascaded diagnostic-and-corrective roll-
out that generates group-structured trajectories for
relative advantage estimation, and introduces a
saturation-aware gain shaping to provide informa-
tive learning signals even when improvements be-
come incremental.
Our main contributions are: (1) We identify and
empirically demonstrate critic staleness in critique-
guided RL, freezing the critic leads to a clear decay
in critique utility as the policy improves. (2) We in-
troduce ECHO, a synchronized co-evolutionary op-
timization paradigm that jointly aligns the critic and
the policy via dual-track GRPO. (3) We propose a
saturation-aware reward design and group-relative
optimization scheme that jointly improve training
stability and boost performance across tasks.
2
Related Work
In long-horizon decision-making for LLM-based
agents, scalar outcome rewards are often non-
diagnostic, motivating language-based critiques
as actionable supervision (Gao et al., 2025; Yang
et al., 2025b; Zhao et al., 2025). Prior work typi-
cally implements language critics either as static,
template/offline-generated feedback, or as sepa-
rately trained critic models.
Template-based Critics.
A lightweight line of
work injects pre-defined hints as critique sig-
nals, avoiding training a separate critic model.
HINT (Wang et al., 2025) steers ineffective roll-
outs toward effectiveness by appending generic,
hand-crafted hints to trigger regeneration. Tang
et al. (2025) further adopts a small set of error-
conditioned prompt templates, routing different
failure cases to different pre-defined guidance
patterns.
Moving beyond generic guidance,
LUFFY (Yan et al., 2025) mitigates inefficient ex-
ploration by injecting a teacher model’s correct
answer as the rollout outcome. To better control
the granularity of the guidance, more structured
hints have also been explored. GHPO (Liu et al.,
2025) and ADHint (Zhang et al., 2025a) provides
stronger supervision by injecting masked partial
reference solutions as hints, effectively revealing
part of the answer to stabilize and accelerate learn-
ing.
StepHint (Zhang et al., 2025b) uses a teacher
model to generate a full chain-of-thought, splits it
into N reasoning steps, and forms hints by con-
catenating different numbers of prefix steps. In
contrast, Scaf-GRPO (Zhang et al., 2025c) designs
critic templates that progress from abstract to con-
crete guidance, providing coarse-to-fine guidance
conditioned on the model’s current performance.
Training-based Critics.
Another line of work
trains dedicated critic models to generate more
informative, diagnostic feedback.
Early at-
tempts (Saunders et al., 2022; Ke et al., 2024; Xi
et al., 2024; Tang et al.) primarily rely on single-
stage fine-tuning, typically by curating critique
datasets and training models to generate natural-
language feedback for evaluation and verification.
Yu et al. (2025) propose Refinement-oriented Cri-
tique Optimization (RCO), which trains a critic in a
critique–refinement loop by rewarding critiques ac-
cording to the utility of the actor’s refined outputs.
Multi-stage training has also been investigated to
stabilize learning across different training objec-
tives. CGI (Yang et al., 2025b) leverages critique-
guided iterative improvement for agents through
staged updates, typically treating the critic as a
fixed supervisor. CTRL (Xie et al., 2025) intro-
duces a two-stage training pipeline that first distills
critiques via SFT and then applies GRPO to opti-
mize critique generation directly for downstream
refinement success.
Despite these advances, most training-based crit-
ics are trained off-policy and then frozen or up-
dated asynchronously, remaining decoupled from
on-policy policy learning. As the policy’s trajec-
tory distribution and failure patterns shift over time,
the critic becomes stale, and its ability to provide
useful critiques gradually decays.

Policy
Model
🔥
Cri,c
Model
🔥
Guidance
Cri+c
Generate/
Reﬁne
Update
Origin 𝜏!
Reﬁne 𝜏"
  𝑠!
  𝑠"
Cri+que 𝑐
Diagnose
Fine-tuned Model
Policy
Model
🔥
Cri,c
Module
❄
Oﬀ-the-shelf Templates
or
Decoupled
Sta+c Evalua+on
Inﬂexible Feedback
{
}
(a) Conven*onal Sta*c Paradigms
(b) Our ECHO Paradigm
Figure 1: Comparison of critic paradigms. (a) Conventional Static Paradigms: Use decoupled, frozen critic
modules initialized from off-the-shelf templates or fine-tuned separate models, resulting in static evaluation and
inflexible feedback. (b) Our ECHO Paradigm: Policy and critic co-evolve organically. The policy first generates
an initial rollout τo, refined to τr using the critic’s diagnostic guidance c. Both models are jointly updated, ensuring
the critic’s diagnostic precision synchronizes with the policy’s evolving failure patterns.
3
Methodology
To address critic staleness caused by decoupled
training under on-policy failure-pattern drift, we
propose ECHO, a co-evolutionary interplay be-
tween a Policy Pθ and a Critic Cψ, rather than
a static supervision task. Within this paradigm, we
treat the refinement process as a dynamic synchro-
nization problem where two models co-evolve in a
shared on-policy trajectory space:
• Pθ (The Actor) learns to convert diagnostic
feedback into corrective actions. Rather than
relying on unguided exploration, it conditions
on the critic’s current diagnoses to produce
refinements that directly improve task reward.
• Cψ (The Diagnostic Evolver) is rewarded for
feedback that maximizes the policy’s perfor-
mance gain, thereby learning to pinpoint the
flaws that causes the policy’s failure.
This joint evolution ensures that the critic’s diag-
nostic depth is continuously calibrated to the pol-
icy’s shifting failure patterns. By optimizing both
models through a dual-track GRPO mechanism,
we transform the refinement process into a self-
improving system where evaluative precision and
execution capability evolve in tandem. Figure 2
summarizes the overall training loop and illustrates
a concrete refinement example.
3.1
Cascaded Evolutionary Rollout
To facilitate the symbiotic optimization of both
models, ECHO employs a cascaded rollout mech-
anism that generates group-structured trajectories
through a diagnostic-and-corrective cycle.
Stage 1: Multi-view Diagnosis.
Given a query
q, the policy Pθ first generates an initial trajectory
τo ∼Pθ(· | q). To provide an objective basis for di-
agnosis, an external reward model R evaluates the
proposal to obtain a baseline score so = R(q, τo).
Conditioned on both the trajectory and its corre-
sponding score, the critic Cψ is invoked N times
independently to produce a set of diverse diagnostic
feedbacks GC = {c(j)
o }N
j=1:
c(j)
o
∼Cψ(· | q, τo, so),
j = 1, 2, . . . , N.
(1)
By incorporating so into the prompt, the critic is
empowered to provide "score-aware" explanations,
identifying the specific gaps that prevent the trajec-
tory from achieving a higher reward.
Stage 2: Conditional Refinement.
Following
the diagnosis, the policy Pθ is required to inter-
nalize these critiques into precise corrective ac-
tions. Conditioned on the augmented input ˜q(j) =
(q, c(j)
o ), the policy samples a corresponding set of
refined trajectories:
τ (j)
r
∼Pθ(· | ˜q(j)),
j = 1, 2, . . . , N.
(2)
The reward model evaluates each refinement to
yield the post-correction scores s(j)
r
= R(q, τ (j)
r ).
This cascaded rollout produces the baseline score
so, the critique group GC, and the refinement group
GP = {τ (j)
r }N
j=1, which serve as the empirical sig-
nals for the co-evolutionary optimization.

Query
𝜋!!
Policy 
at step 𝑡
Original  Rollout
𝑅
Reward
Model
0.2
𝜋"!
Cri7c 
at step 𝑡
Refined  Rollout
Policy 
at step 𝑡
+
Augmented by 
each cri7que
Reward
Model
0.5
SA Scoring
𝑁
Updates
𝜋"!"#
𝑅
𝜋!!
Updates
𝜋!!"#
0.4
Your task is to measure
the temperature of
unknown substance B,
which is located around
the bathroom ...
Thought: To measure the 
temperature of substance 
B, ﬁrst I should locate B 
near the bathroom. …
Ac*on: Go to bathroom...
Critique
𝑁
1. Get a thermometer 
before searching the 
bathroom. Then go to the 
bathroom and measure B 
in one pass. 2. … 
Thought: I will obtain a 
thermometer first, then 
measure B. It is likely in 
the kitchen, so I will…
Action: Go to kitchen…
Figure 2: Overview of ECHO training with saturation-aware (SA) critic rewards. At step t, the policy πθt produces
rollouts τo, which are scored by a reward model to obtain so. A critic πψt generates critiques that are appended
to the original query to elicit refined rollouts τr, scored as sr. We compute the SA critic reward rc to emphasize
last-mile improvements near saturation, and update the critic and policy synchronously to obtain πψt+1 and πθt+1.
3.2
Saturation-Aware Reward Design
A straightforward approach to quantifying the util-
ity of a critique is to measure the linear improve-
ment in reward, i.e., ∆s = sr −so. However,
this linear metric fails to account for the satura-
tion effect in model optimization: as the initial
score so approaches the performance ceiling (e.g.,
s →1), the marginal effort and information re-
quired to achieve a further increment surge. Treat-
ing an improvement from 0.9 to 0.95 as equivalent
to one from 0.1 to 0.15 creates an "equidistant fal-
lacy," which discourages the critic from diagnosing
subtle yet critical flaws in high-quality proposals
and leads to optimization plateaus.
To address this, we hypothesize that the reward
space is non-linear and governed by a difficulty
weighting function ω(s). We define ω(s) as a soft
barrier function that captures the increasing dif-
ficulty of entropy reduction as perfection is ap-
proached:
ω(s) =
1
1 −s + η,
(3)
where η > 0 is a smoothing hyperparameter. We
define the intrinsic gain of a refinement as the path
integral of ω(s) from so to sr:
g(so, sr) =
Z sr
so
ω(s)ds = ln
1 −so + η
1 −sr + η

.
(4)
This choice yields a principled shaping sig-
nal (Ng et al., 1999) with three desirable properties.
First, it is saturation-aware: for the same ∆s, the
gain g is larger when the improvement happens
in a higher-score region, encouraging the critic to
focus on subtle yet impactful flaws in near-correct
proposals. Second, it is additive (path-consistent):
g(so, sm) + g(sm, sr) = g(so, sr),
(5)
which makes the training signal invariant to
whether refinement is performed in one step or
through multiple intermediate edits. Third, the gain
is antisymmetric, g(so, sr) = −g(sr, so), provid-
ing a unified measure that rewards improvements
and penalizes regressions under the same scale.
Finally, we use this intrinsic gain directly as the
critic reward:
rc = g(so, sr) = ln
1 −so + η
1 −sr + η

.
(6)
3.3
Synchronized Co-evolutionary
Optimization
Instead of treating the critic as a static oracle, we
operationalize the co-evolution as a synchronized
dual-track alignment problem. We formulate a
closed-loop optimization where both Pθ and Cψ ex-
plore a shared trajectory space, mutually anchoring
each other’s learning progress. This is achieved by
constructing two interdependent group structures:
GP (q) = {τ (1)
r
, τ (2)
r
, . . . , τ (N)
r
},
(7)
GC(q, τo) = {c(1)
o , c(2)
o , . . . , c(N)
o
}.
(8)
Here, GC represents the diagnostic hypothesis
space containing N distinct interpretations of the

proposal’s flaws, while GP represents the corrective
action space conditioned on those hypotheses.
Dual-Track Advantage Estimation.
To maxi-
mize sample efficiency, we compute group-relative
advantages that capture the marginal utility of each
model’s output. For the policy Pθ, the advantage
A(j)
P
is computed by normalizing the scores s(j)
r
within GP . This allows the policy to efficiently
identify the most effective refinement paths from
diverse diagnostic samples (Wang et al., 2022b;
Cobbe et al., 2021). For the critic Cψ, the advan-
tage A(j)
C is derived by performing group-relative
normalization on the saturation-aware rewards r(j)
c
defined in Section 3.2. By amplifying high-score
gains and balancing penalties via λ, the mecha-
nism enables the critic model to rapidly converge
on effective feedback.
Synchronized Update.
Following the Group-
Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) objec-
tive (Shao et al., 2024), both Pθ and Cψ are up-
dated by maximizing a surrogate objective that in-
corporates advantage-weighted likelihood and a
KL divergence constraint:
J (ϕ) =Eq∼D,{oi}N
i=1∼Mϕold
"
1
N
N
X
i=1
1
|oi|
|oi|
X
t=1
min

ρi,t(ϕ)Ai,
clip(ρi,t(ϕ), 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ)Ai
#
−βDKL(Mϕ∥Mref),
(9)
where ϕ ∈{θ, ψ} represents the parameters of
the policy or critic, and oi denotes the generated
sequence. The importance sampling ratio is de-
fined as ρi,t(ϕ) =
Mϕ(oi,t|ctx,oi,<t)
Mϕold(oi,t|ctx,oi,<t), where ctx is
the corresponding input context for each model.
Ai ∈{AP , AC} is the respective group-relative ad-
vantage. This synchronized optimization ensures
the critic’s diagnostic focus is continuously cali-
brated to the policy’s evolving failure patterns, fos-
tering a self-reinforcing curriculum for continuous
improvement. For completeness, the full pseudo-
code of ECHO is provided in Appendix D.
4
Experiment Setup
Scenarios and tasks.
To evaluate ECHO across
a broad spectrum of cognitive challenges, we con-
duct experiments in four diverse environments.
Specifically, for web navigation, we use Web-
Shop (Yao et al., 2022), requiring agents to nav-
igate e-commerce platforms and make purchas-
ing decisions; for embodied tasks, ALFWorld
(Shridhar et al., 2020) challenges agents with long-
horizon planning and object manipulation in house-
hold settings; for scientific tasks, SciWorld (Wang
et al., 2022a) provides a simulator for complex
experimental reasoning and hypothesis verifica-
tion; and for deep search, we adopt the RAG-based
DeepSearch environment from Xi et al. (2025),
which requires multi-turn information synthesis for
open-domain question answering. More details are
shown in Appendix A.
Baselines and backbone models.
We utilize
Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Yang et al., 2025a) (de-
noted as Qwen3-4B in the following) and Qwen2.5-
7B (Team et al., 2024) as primary backbone mod-
els. By default, the critic Cψ uses the same back-
bone as the policy Pθ. To ensure a rigorous and
comprehensive evaluation, we compare our method
against a diverse set of strong baselines spanning
both proprietary and open-source large language
models. Specifically, for proprietary models, we
include GPT series (Achiam et al., 2023), Gemini-
2.5-pro (Comanici et al., 2025), and Claude-Sonnet-
4.5. In addition, we consider Open-sourced Mod-
els as competitive baselines, including Qwen3-
235B-A22B (Yang et al., 2025a) and DeepSeek-
R1-0528 (Guo et al., 2025). The implementation
detail is described in Appendix B.
5
Results
Table 1 presents the main results. We organize
our analysis around three research questions: RQ1
evaluates the overall effectiveness of ECHO on
open-world agent benchmarks; RQ2 investigates
whether failure patterns drift during on-policy
learning and whether this drift causes a frozen critic
to become stale; and RQ3 studies why the proposed
saturation-aware reward is beneficial, especially
for last-mile improvements near the reward ceiling.
More detailed experimental results and analyses
are provided in Appendix C.
5.1
RQ1: How effective is ECHO for
open-world agent learning?
ECHO
consistently
outperforms
standard
GRPO and other strong baselines.
As shown
in Table 1, ECHO consistently surpasses GRPO
under the same training budget, supporting our hy-
pothesis that synchronized, on-policy critiques re-
duce unproductive exploration and thus improve
data efficiency. The most salient gains appear on
Qwen3-4B in long-horizon search and web interac-
tion: on DeepSearch, ECHO improves from 33.25
to 47.25, roughly a 42% relative increase; on Web-

Table 1: Main results on four open-world agent benchmarks. Bold indicates the best result within each benchmark.
Models
WebShop
ALFWorld
SciWorld
DeepSearch
Overall
Proprietary Models
GPT-4o-mini
56.59
45.20
40.68
31.43
43.48
GPT-4o
58.20
44.45
45.78
26.19
43.66
GPT-4-turbo
52.45
42.64
34.14
61.90
47.78
GPT-4.1
58.07
43.56
35.65
61.46
49.67
GPT-5
46.12
35.09
13.06
72.19
41.62
Gemini-2.5-pro
65.58
68.04
12.50
36.50
45.66
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
58.80
64.73
56.83
65.00
61.34
Open-sourced Models ≥100B
Qwen3-235B-A22B
25.26
26.60
23.50
28.25
25.90
DeepSeek-R1-0528
44.81
72.50
4.50
40.25
40.52
Open-sourced Models < 100B & RL
Qwen3-4B
6.12
0.32
4.50
20.25
7.80
Qwen3-4B + GRPO
82.37
87.50
79.14
33.25
70.57
Qwen3-4B + ECHO
90.03
91.25
82.88
47.25
77.85
Qwen2.5-7B
13.98
2.00
1.50
15.50
8.25
Qwen2.5-7B + GRPO
83.55
89.50
81.24
42.25
74.14
Qwen2.5-7B + ECHO
89.97
93.75
85.63
46.75
79.03
Shop, it rises from 82.37 to 90.03, about a 9% rela-
tive increase. These boosts indicate that ECHO is
especially effective when success depends on diag-
nosing and repairing specific failure causes across
multiple steps. Importantly, in more complex em-
bodied and scientific environments where failures
are more diverse and harder to localize, ECHO
also brings consistent gains on Qwen3-4B, improv-
ing ALFWorld from 87.50 to 91.25 and SciWorld
from 79.14 to 82.88. Overall, ECHO improves
performance across all four benchmarks, achieving
an average gain of 7.28 points over GRPO, and it
delivers highly competitive results against much
stronger baselines: except for DeepSearch where
GPT-5 attains the best score, ECHO matches or
surpasses all listed strong models by a clear margin
on the other benchmarks.
ECHO generalizes across backbone sizes.
To
test whether ECHO is applicable across different
backbone sizes, we also evaluate it on Qwen2.5-
7B. The results show that ECHO is not restricted
to a specific capacity regime. Instead, it consis-
tently improves over GRPO on both backbones
and yields strong performance across environments.
This demonstrates that the benefit of synchronized
critic-policy co-evolution transfers across model
scales, highlighting the versatility and generaliz-
ability of ECHO for open-world agent learning.
5.2
RQ2: Does fail-pattern drift happen
during on-policy learning?
5.2.1
How Failures Change Over Training
To further examine whether failure patterns drift
under on-policy training, we analyze the training
trajectory of Qwen3-4B and partition it into three
phases: early, intermediate, and late. In each phase,
we select three adjacent policy checkpoints, and for
every checkpoint we run rollouts on the same held-
out test set. We collect all unsuccessful trajectories
produced in each phase and treat them as samples
from the phase-specific failure distribution. For
each unsuccessful trajectory, we use Gemini-2.5-
pro to produce a concise diagnosis describing the
underlying error cause. We then embed these diag-
noses using Qwen3-8B-Embedding and visualize
the resulting representations with t-SNE (Maaten
and Hinton, 2008).
Phase-wise drift of dominant failure modes.
Figure 3 shows clear distributional drift across all
four environments. In WebShop and DeepSearch,
failures in each phase form relatively compact clus-
ters, and the high-density centers shift substantially
from early to late.
This indicates that training

Table 2: Ablation results of ECHO. “w/o” denotes removing the specified component. Since SA shaping relies on
meaningful reward magnitudes, we focus on WebShop and SciWorld, two benchmarks with non-binary rewards.
Methods
WebShop
ALFWorld
SciWorld
DeepSearch
Avg(↓)
Qwen3-4B
GRPO
82.37
87.50
79.14
33.25
-
ECHO
90.03
91.25
82.88
47.25
-
ECHO w/o evloving
83.60
85.75
68.58
40.25
9.25
ECHO w/o SA-aware
86.69
-
78.55
-
3.84
Qwen2.5-7B
GRPO
83.55
89.50
81.24
42.25
-
ECHO
89.97
93.75
85.63
46.75
-
ECHO w/o evloving
84.99
92.50
72.19
42.50
5.98
ECHO w/o SA-aware
86.78
-
83.65
-
2.59
WebShop
ALFWorld
SciWorld
DeepSearch
Figure 3: Failure-pattern drift across training phases. We visualize failed trajectories from early, intermediate, and
late checkpoints in a diagnosis embedding space using t-SNE, with contours indicating density regions.
changes which error causes dominate, rather than
simply shrinking a fixed set of mistakes.
Higher diversity and partial persistence in com-
plex environments.
In the more complex envi-
ronments ALFWorld and SciWorld, the failure dis-
tributions are more dispersed and partially overlap
across phases, reflecting higher failure-mode diver-
sity and the persistence of some recurring errors.
Even in these settings, the density mass still mi-
grates across training phases, confirming that the
dominant failure patterns remain non-stationary.
5.2.2
Limitations of Frozen Critics under
Failure-Pattern Drift
To further validate the need for critic adaptation
under failure-pattern drift, we freeze the critic and
rerun the experiments with all other components of
ECHO unchanged. Results are presented in Table 2
and illustrated by the training curves in Figure 5.
Final performance drops with a frozen critic.
We find that this simple change leads to perfor-
mance degradation across all environments, indi-
cating that keeping critiques synchronized with the
evolving policy is important for maintaining their
effectiveness. Meanwhile, the degradation is most
severe on ALFWorld and SciWorld, and even un-
derperform standard GRPO. We conjecture that in
these more complex environments, a stale critic
more frequently produces redundant or off-target
diagnoses, which the policy may over-condition on
during refinement, turning critiques into noise and
amplifying long-horizon errors.
Training dynamics reveal phase-dependent ef-
fects.
Figure 5 further shows that the benefit of
co-evolution depends on both training phase and en-
vironment. On WebShop, the frozen-critic variant
can look strong early on, but its improvement slows
later and is overtaken by ECHO, consistent with
later-stage errors becoming more fine-grained such
that stale critiques are increasingly miscalibrated
and act as noise that reduces sampling efficiency.
In ALFWorld and SciWorld, ECHO stays close
to GRPO at the beginning and separates mainly
in the mid-to-late stage, suggesting a short cali-
bration period in which the critic learns to pro-
duce environment-specific, actionable diagnoses

𝑠!
𝑠!
𝑠!
𝑠!
𝑠"
Linear
SA-aware
Linear
SA-aware
WebShop
SciWorld
Figure 4: Effect of saturation-aware gain shaping on last-mile refinement. We plot density scatter maps of pre-
refinement and post-refinement rewards (so, sr) on WebShop and SciWorld using Qwen3-4B. Points in the green
region satisfy sr > so and correspond to reward-improving refinements, where higher density indicates more
effective critiques. The highlighted high-score square marks the near-ceiling regime.
WebShop
ALFWorld
SciWorld
DeepSearch
Figure 5: Training reward curves across four environ-
ments (Qwen3-4B).
for long-horizon failures before its advantage be-
comes visible. By contrast, on DeepSearch, ECHO
improves more steeply in the early stage; we hy-
pothesize this is because the evaluator is highly
sensitive to output format and interaction proto-
col, so the critic can quickly correct systematic,
easy-to-specify early failures.
Overall, these curves support our claim that cri-
tique strategies are non-stationary under on-policy
training: as failure modes drift, a frozen critic be-
comes increasingly mismatched, whereas synchro-
nized co-evolution helps maintain critique utility
throughout training.
5.3
RQ3: Why is the saturation-aware (SA)
reward design effective?
To examine whether SA gain shaping provides a
more informative learning signal than a linear im-
provement reward, we compare two reward designs
on Qwen3-4B in WebShop and SciWorld: the lin-
ear reward ∆s = sr −so, and our saturation-aware
gain g(so, sr) in Eq. 6.
As shown in Table 2, disabling SA shaping while
keeping the rest of ECHO unchanged leads to con-
sistent drops on both datasets. Notably, the degra-
dation is larger on WebShop. We attribute this to
the different regimes reached by the policy: Sci-
World is more challenging and the learned agent
remains further from saturation, so training is less
dominated by last-mile refinements where SA shap-
ing is designed to provide extra signal; in contrast,
WebShop more often enters a near-ceiling regime,
making SA shaping more impactful.
To further understand where SA shaping helps
during refinement, we next visualize the joint dis-
tribution of pre-refinement and post-refinement re-
wards (so, sr) in Figure 4. Since saturation effects
are most salient when trajectory rewards are al-
ready high, we focus on the middle-to-late stage
of training. Specifically, we extract a window of
10 consecutive rollout batches, remove trajectories
with so = 1, and visualize the joint distribution of
(so, sr) as density scatter plots in Figure 4.
Overall refinement effectiveness.
Across both
WebShop and SciWorld, saturation-aware shap-
ing concentrates substantially more probability
mass in the improvement region where sr > so,
shown as the green upper-left triangle in Figure 4.
Higher density in this region indicates that critiques
more reliably translate into reward-increasing re-
finements, suggesting that the saturation-aware de-
sign yields stronger overall refinement effective-
ness than the linear alternative.

Last-mile improvement near the reward ceiling.
In the high-score regime highlighted by the yel-
low square, the most desirable outcomes lie in its
upper-left area, where trajectories start near full
reward and still improve after refinement. For both
datasets, saturation-aware shaping exhibits higher
density in this region, indicating better ability to
convert near-correct trajectories into full-reward so-
lutions. In contrast, the linear reward shows many
samples remaining close to the diagonal in this
regime, especially on SciWorld, indicating that re-
finements tend to preserve the original score and
struggle to achieve the small but critical gains re-
quired near the ceiling.
6
Conclusion
We presented ECHO, a co-evolution framework
for open-world LLM agents. By synchronizing
critic and policy updates, ECHO mitigates critic
staleness under on-policy failure drift. The pro-
posed cascaded rollout provides group-structured
samples for group-relative optimization, while the
saturation-aware gain shaping boosts last-mile im-
provements. Together, these designs enable the
critic’s diagnostic granularity to stay aligned with
the policy’s evolving failure modes, supporting
more stable training and sustained refinement.
Limitations
Our framework updates both the policy and the
critic using improvement signals computed from
the same external reward model. Therefore, its
effectiveness depends on reward quality and cal-
ibration: if the reward is noisy, biased, or under-
specified, the critic may optimize toward evaluator
artifacts rather than truly diagnostic feedback, and
the policy may inherit the same misalignment.
Moreover, reward evaluation and critique gener-
ation are handled by separate models in our current
implementation. A natural next step is to unify
them into a single model that both scores trajecto-
ries and produces actionable critiques, which could
simplify the training pipeline and improve consis-
tency between “what is rewarded” and “what is sug-
gested.” We leave this integration to future work.
References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, and 1 others. 2023. Gpt-4 techni-
cal report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.
AI Anthropic. 2024. The claude 3 model family: Opus,
sonnet, haiku. claude-3 model card. In Conference
on Natural Language Processing, volume 1.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian,
Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias
Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro
Nakano, and 1 others. 2021.
Training verifiers
to solve math word problems.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168.
Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann,
Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-
cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and
1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with
advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and
next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.06261.
Shehzaad Dhuliawala, Mojtaba Komeili, Jing Xu,
Roberta Raileanu, Xian Li, Asli Celikyilmaz, and
Jason Weston. 2024. Chain-of-verification reduces
hallucination in large language models. In Findings
of the association for computational linguistics: ACL
2024, pages 3563–3578.
Bofei Gao, Zefan Cai, Runxin Xu, Peiyi Wang,
Ce Zheng, Runji Lin, Keming Lu, Dayiheng Liu,
Chang Zhou, Wen Xiao, and 1 others. 2025. Llm crit-
ics help catch bugs in mathematics: Towards a better
mathematical verifier with natural language feedback.
In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 14588–14604.
Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao
Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shi-
rong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, and 1 others. 2025.
Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.12948.
Qihan Huang, Weilong Dai, Jinlong Liu, Wanggui He,
Hao Jiang, Mingli Song, Jingyuan Chen, Chang
Yao, and Jie Song. 2025. Boosting mllm reason-
ing with text-debiased hint-grpo.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.23905.
Pei Ke, Bosi Wen, Andrew Feng, Xiao Liu, Xuanyu
Lei, Jiale Cheng, Shengyuan Wang, Aohan Zeng,
Yuxiao Dong, Hongning Wang, and 1 others. 2024.
Critiquellm: Towards an informative critique gener-
ation model for evaluation of large language model
generation. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 13034–13054.
Ziru Liu, Cheng Gong, Xinyu Fu, Yaofang Liu, Ran
Chen, Shoubo Hu, Suiyun Zhang, Rui Liu, Qingfu
Zhang, and Dandan Tu. 2025.
GHPO: Adaptive
Guidance for Stable and Efficient LLM Reinforce-
ment Learning. arXiv preprint. ArXiv:2507.10628
[cs].

Laurens van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. 2008.
Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
learning research, 9(Nov):2579–2605.
Nat McAleese, Rai Michael Pokorny, Juan Felipe Ceron
Uribe, Evgenia Nitishinskaya, Maja Trebacz, and Jan
Leike. 2024. Llm critics help catch llm bugs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.00215.
Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. 1999.
Policy invariance under reward transformations: The-
ory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, vol-
ume 99, pages 278–287. Citeseer.
William Saunders, Catherine Yeh, Jeff Wu, Steven Bills,
Long Ouyang, Jonathan Ward, and Jan Leike. 2022.
Self-critiquing models for assisting human evaluators.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05802.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, and 1 others. 2024.
Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté,
Yonatan Bisk,
Adam Trischler,
and Matthew
Hausknecht. 2020. Alfworld: Aligning text and em-
bodied environments for interactive learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2010.03768.
Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, and 1 others. 1998.
Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1.
MIT press Cambridge.
Chenming Tang, Hsiu-Yuan Huang, Weijie Liu, Saiyong
Yang, and Yunfang Wu. 2025. Do not step into the
same river twice: Learning to reason from trial and
error. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26109.
Zhengyang Tang, Ziniu Li, Zhenyang Xiao, Tian Ding,
Ruoyu Sun, Benyou Wang, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang,
Tianyu Liu, Bowen Yu, and 1 others. Self-evolving
critique abilities in large language models. In Second
Conference on Language Modeling.
Kimi Team, Yifan Bai, Yiping Bao, Guanduo Chen,
Jiahao Chen, Ningxin Chen, Ruijue Chen, Yanru
Chen, Yuankun Chen, Yutian Chen, and 1 others.
2025. Kimi k2: Open agentic intelligence. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.20534.
Qwen Team and 1 others. 2024. Qwen2 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10671, 2(3).
Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and
Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. 2022a. Scienceworld: Is
your agent smarter than a 5th grader? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.07540.
Xinyi Wang, Jinyi Han, Zishang Jiang, Tingyun Li, Ji-
aqing Liang, Sihang Jiang, Zhaoqian Dai, Shuguang
Ma, Fei Yu, and Yanghua Xiao. 2025. Hint: Helping
ineffective rollouts navigate towards effectiveness.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09388.
Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc
Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. 2022b. Self-consistency improves
chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.11171.
Xumeng Wen, Zihan Liu, Shun Zheng, Shengyu Ye,
Zhirong Wu, Yang Wang, Zhijian Xu, Xiao Liang,
Junjie Li, Ziming Miao, and 1 others. 2025. Rein-
forcement learning with verifiable rewards implicitly
incentivizes correct reasoning in base llms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.14245.
Zhiheng Xi, Jixuan Huang, Chenyang Liao, Baodai
Huang, Honglin Guo, Jiaqi Liu, Rui Zheng, Junjie Ye,
Jiazheng Zhang, Wenxiang Chen, and 1 others. 2025.
Agentgym-rl: Training llm agents for long-horizon
decision making through multi-turn reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08755.
Zhiheng Xi, Dingwen Yang, Jixuan Huang, Jiafu Tang,
Guanyu Li, Yiwen Ding, Wei He, Boyang Hong,
Shihan Do, Wenyu Zhan, and 1 others. 2024. En-
hancing llm reasoning via critique models with test-
time and training-time supervision. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.16579.
Zhihui Xie, Jie Chen, Liyu Chen, Weichao Mao,
Jingjing Xu, and Lingpeng Kong. 2025. Teaching
language models to critique via reinforcement learn-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03492.
Jianhao Yan, Yafu Li, Zican Hu, Zhi Wang, Ganqu
Cui, Xiaoye Qu, Yu Cheng, and Yue Zhang. 2025.
Learning to reason under off-policy guidance. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.14945.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng,
Bowen Yu,
Chang
Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others.
2025a.
Qwen3 technical report.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388.
Ruihan Yang, Fanghua Ye, Jian Li, Siyu Yuan, Yikai
Zhang, Zhaopeng Tu, Xiaolong Li, and Deqing Yang.
2025b.
The lighthouse of language: Enhancing
llm agents via critique-guided improvement. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.16024.
Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik
Narasimhan. 2022. Webshop: Towards scalable real-
world web interaction with grounded language agents.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:20744–20757.
Tianshu Yu, Chao Xiang, Mingchuan Yang, Pei Ke,
Bosi Wen, Cunxiang Wang, Jiale Cheng, Li Zhang,
Xinyu Mu, Chuxiong Sun, and 1 others. 2025. Train-
ing language model to critique for better refinement.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22157.
Feng Zhang, Zezhong Tan, Xinhong Ma, Ziqiang
Dong, Xi Leng, Jianfei Zhao, Xin Sun, and Yang
Yang. 2025a. Adhint: Adaptive hints with difficulty
priors for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.13095.

Kaiyi Zhang, Ang Lv, Jinpeng Li, Yongbo Wang, Feng
Wang, Haoyuan Hu, and Rui Yan. 2025b. Stephint:
Multi-level stepwise hints enhance reinforcement
learning to reason. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02841.
Xichen Zhang, Sitong Wu, Yinghao Zhu, Haoru Tan,
Shaozuo Yu, Ziyi He, and Jiaya Jia. 2025c. Scaf-
grpo: Scaffolded group relative policy optimiza-
tion for enhancing llm reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.19807.
Pengxiang Zhao, Guangyi Liu, Yaozhen Liang, Weiqing
He, Zhengxi Lu, Yuehao Huang, Yaxuan Guo,
Kexin Zhang, Hao Wang, Liang Liu, and 1 others.
2025. Mas-bench: A unified benchmark for shortcut-
augmented hybrid mobile gui agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.06477.

A
Environments and Scoring Criteria
The evaluation environments used in our experiments are summarized in Table 3, including their task
settings, the core abilities required of the agent, and the official scoring criteria.
Table 3: Overview of evaluation environments. We summarize each environment’s setting, the core abilities required
from the agent, and the scoring criterion used by the official evaluator.
Environments
Description
Required Agent Ability
Score Criterion
WebShop (Yao
et al., 2022)
An interactive e-commerce
website
simulator
where
the agent navigates product
pages and selects an item that
satisfies a natural-language
shopping goal.
Goal parsing, web nav-
igation, information re-
trieval, constraint track-
ing, reasoning over semi-
structured fields.
Purchase-based success,
rewarding
buys
that
match
the
requested
product
type
and
constraints (attributes/op-
tions/price).
ALFWorld
(Shridhar et al.,
2020)
A
text-based
embodied
household
environment
derived
from
ALFRED,
requiring multi-step manip-
ulation (e.g., pick, place,
clean, heat) to accomplish
instructions.
Subgoal decomposition,
spatial and physical com-
monsense, hierarchical
planning, multi-step ac-
tion execution,
instru-
ment operation.
Binary episode success
judged by completion of
the specified household
task.
SciWorld
(Wang et al.,
2022a)
A simulated scientific discov-
ery environment where the
agent performs experiments,
uses instruments, and rea-
sons over observations to sat-
isfy a scientific objective.
Scientific skills, exper-
imental design, instru-
ment operation, causal
and mechanistic reason-
ing.
Progress-based scoring
that rewards completing
required main subgoals
in order (with optional
bonus goals), while any
out-of-order main step
triggers a failure score.
DeepSearch
(Xi
et
al.,
2025)
A retrieval-augmented multi-
turn QA environment where
the agent must search, read,
and synthesize evidence to
answer open-domain ques-
tions.
Query
decomposition,
iterative
retrieval,
ev-
idence
aggregation,
faithful synthesis, termi-
nation control.
Answer-level correctness
judged by the official QA
evaluator
(exact-match
style).

Table 4: Performance comparison with established critique-guided baselines across four environments.
Method
WebShop
ALFWorld
SciWorld
DeepSearch
Overall
RCO
35.64
3.00
16.50
25.75
20.22
LUFFY
80.34
80.92
70.44
31.00
65.18
ECHO
90.03
91.25
82.88
47.25
77.85
B
More Implementation Details
All experiments are conducted with sixteen H20-100GB GPUs. We use the same learning rate for both
the policy Pθ and the critic Cψ, setting lrθ = lrψ = 1 × 10−6. We set the rollout group size to N = 8 by
default, i.e., for each query we sample 8 independent critiques from the critic and generate 8 corresponding
refinements conditioned on these critiques. For the policy model, we follow the official setup for both
reward design and evaluation protocols to ensure a fair and consistent comparison. For the critic model,
we use the reward function in Eq. (6) and set the η to 0.1 in all experiments.
C
Additional Experimental Analyses
We provides additional experimental analyses that complement the main results in the paper. Specifically,
we first include comparisons with additional critique-guided baselines beyond the standard GRPO setup.
We then analyze the effectiveness of critique-guided refinement, verify whether refinements genuinely
follow the critic’s diagnostic feedback, and study how critique granularity evolves during training. Finally,
we report a detailed training time analysis to quantify the computational overhead introduced by ECHO.
Unless otherwise specified, all experiments in this appendix are conducted using the Qwen3-4B model.
C.1
Comparisons with Additional Critique-Guided Baselines
To further strengthen the empirical evaluation of ECHO, we include additional comparisons with two
representative critique-guided approaches beyond the standard GRPO baseline. Specifically, we consider
RCO, a training-based critic optimization framework that iteratively refines trajectories using a learned
critic, and LUFFY, a strong refinement method that leverages teacher-provided solutions during trajectory
improvement. These methods represent two common paradigms of critique-guided learning: training-
based and template-based critics.
Table 4 presents the performance comparison across four environments. ECHO consistently outperforms
both baselines across all tasks. Notably, although LUFFY benefits from strong teacher hints derived
from ground-truth solutions, ECHO still achieves higher performance without access to such privileged
supervision. This result suggests that the improvements of ECHO arise not from stronger external
guidance, but from the adaptive diagnostic feedback provided by the co-evolving critic, which remains
aligned with the policy’s evolving failure patterns.
We note that RCO performs comparatively worse in our setting primarily because it does not update
the policy model itself, relying instead on an iterative refine-and-evaluate process with a fixed policy.
Such a design is less effective in long-horizon interactive environments where policy adaptation is critical.
Overall, these results further support our conclusion that critic co-evolution, rather than the choice of RL
optimizer alone, plays a key role in driving the performance gains of ECHO.
C.2
Effectiveness of Critique-Guided Refinement
We first investigate whether the performance gains brought by ECHO truly arise from critic-guided
refinement, rather than simply from additional trajectory sampling. To this end, we design a controlled
comparison that isolates the effect of the critic’s diagnostic feedback.
For each query, we first generate an initial trajectory using the current policy. We then produce a
second-pass rollout under two conditions: (1) Critic-Guided Refinement, where the trajectory is refined
based on the critic’s diagnostic feedback, and (2) No-Critic Regeneration, where we simply re-sample
trajectories without any critique. For both conditions, we generate N = 8 trajectories and compute the

Table 5: Reward gain from second-pass refinement across training phases. Values represent the average reward
gain relative to the initial rollout. Critic-guided refinement is compared with no-critic regeneration under the same
decoding budget.
Dataset
Phase
No-Critic Regen
Critic-Guided Refine
Relative Gain
WebShop
Early
+0.81
+6.54
+5.73
Mid
+0.59
+5.42
+4.83
Late
+0.23
+7.54
+7.31
SciWorld
Early
+0.32
+2.82
+2.50
Mid
+0.43
+3.65
+3.22
Late
+0.34
+3.78
+3.44
group-average reward. We then subtract the reward of the original trajectory to obtain the reward gain for
that query.
Table 5 reports the average reward gains across early, intermediate, and late training checkpoints
on WebShop and SciWorld. The No-Critic Regen column measures the improvement obtained purely
from additional sampling, providing a fine-grained estimate of the natural variability of trajectories. The
Critic-Guided Refine column reports the gains achieved when refinement is guided by the critic. Finally,
Relative Gain measures the additional improvement attributable to the critic beyond this baseline variance.
Across both datasets and all training phases, critic-guided refinement consistently yields substantially
higher reward gains than no-critic regeneration, demonstrating that the critiques provide actionable
guidance beyond simple trajectory re-sampling. Notably, the relative gain becomes larger in the late phase
of training, suggesting that the critic becomes increasingly effective as the policy and critic co-evolve.
C.3
Critique–Refinement Alignment and Granularity Evolution
We next investigate whether the improvements from critique-guided refinement are causally attributable
to the critic’s diagnostic feedback, and further examine how the nature of such feedback evolves during
training.
Critique–Refinement Alignment.
To verify whether refinements genuinely address the issues identified
in critiques, we employ a fixed external evaluator (Gemini-2.5-pro) to assess the alignment between
critiques and refined trajectories. For each instance, the evaluator is provided with the original trajectory,
the critique, and the refined trajectory. Rather than judging overall correctness, it performs a targeted audit
to determine whether the refinement explicitly resolves the issue identified in the critique.
The evaluator assigns one of three labels: YES (issue resolved), NO (issue not addressed), or UNCLEAR.
We discard UNCLEAR cases and report the percentage of YES labels as the issue-addressed rate. As shown
in Table 6, the alignment improves substantially over training. In the early phase, the issue-addressed rate
is around 75%, indicating that the policy has not yet learned to reliably follow critiques. In contrast, in
intermediate and late phases, the rate exceeds 90% across datasets, suggesting that the policy increasingly
learns to act on the critic’s diagnostic feedback.
Evolution of Critique Granularity.
While the above results establish that refinements increasingly
follow critiques, they do not explain why critiques become more effective in later stages. To this end, we
analyze how the granularity of critiques evolves during training.
We classify critiques into three categories, namely Coarse-level, Mid-level, and Fine-grained, based
on their primary intent using a fixed external evaluator. Coarse-level critiques provide general guidance,
mid-level critiques focus on structured reasoning or subtask-level corrections, and fine-grained critiques
identify precise errors or decision points.
As shown in Table 6, a clear shift occurs across training phases: early-stage critiques are dominated by
coarse-level guidance, while mid-level and fine-grained critiques become increasingly prevalent in later
stages. In particular, fine-grained critiques grow substantially in the late phase, indicating that the critic
increasingly focuses on precise error localization.

Table 6: Critique–refinement alignment and critique granularity across training phases (%).
Dataset
Phase
Issue Addressed
Coarse-level
Mid-level
Fine-grained
Critique–Refinement Alignment
WebShop
Early
74.56
62.42
24.12
13.46
Intermediate
93.87
34.70
41.89
23.41
Late
95.30
8.61
49.34
42.05
SciWorld
Early
75.15
68.90
20.66
10.44
Intermediate
92.48
39.23
37.58
23.19
Late
90.02
11.78
41.50
46.72
To better understand this transition, we manually inspect representative rollouts. In early training, the
policy often struggles with basic environment interaction, and critiques primarily provide procedural
guidance. As the policy improves, errors shift toward suboptimal planning and long-horizon reasoning,
and critiques correspondingly evolve to target higher-level decision-making or subtle reasoning flaws.
Overall, these results suggest that improved alignment is not merely a byproduct of training, but is
driven by a systematic shift in critique granularity. As failure modes become more fine-grained and
abstract, the critic adapts to provide increasingly precise and actionable feedback, enabling sustained
performance gains in later stages of training.
C.4
Training Time Analysis
We analyze the computational overhead of ECHO to assess whether the performance gains come at a
significantly increased training cost. In particular, we provide a detailed breakdown of wall-clock training
time to identify the primary sources of overhead.
Table 7 reports the training time decomposition on Qwen3-4B across multiple environments. For
ECHO, we break down the total time into three components: policy rollout, critic rollout, and refinement.
For the baseline GRPO, we report the rollout time and total training time under the same experimental
setup.
The overhead introduced by ECHO’s additional stages, which include initial trajectory generation,
critic evaluation, and updates, is marginal. Compared to the total training time of the baseline GRPO,
these costs are negligible, proving that the co-evolution mechanism itself isn’t a bottleneck.
Instead, the bulk of the extra computation comes from the refinement stage. This is a logical trade-
off: because refinement processes longer contexts, decoding naturally takes more time. Even with this
refinement step, the impact on total wall-clock time remains manageable. We observed an average
increase of roughly 15% over GRPO, representing a modest trade-off given the substantial performance
gains reported in our main experiments. Note that in more demanding environments like ALFWorld and
DeepSearch, training times do climb for both ECHO and GRPO. This is driven by the complexity of the
tasks, not by the co-evolution logic itself.
Ultimately, these results show that ECHO’s success isn’t just the product of a massive compute budget.
By delivering significantly stronger performance for a well-defined, moderate increase in time, ECHO
offers a highly favorable efficiency trade-off.
D
Pseudo-code for ECHO
Algorithm 1 provides the complete training procedure of ECHO. It summarizes the cascaded rollout
pipeline (on-policy proposal τo, multi-view critiques {c(j)
o }, and critique-conditioned refinements {τ (j)
r }),
the saturation-aware critic reward computation in Eq. (6), and the synchronized dual-track GRPO updates

Table 7: Training wall-clock time breakdown (seconds). We report the decomposition of training time for ECHO
and compare it with the baseline GRPO under the same setup.
Component
WebShop
ALFWorld
SciWorld
DeepSearch
Policy Rollout (ECHO)
10
14
10
17
Critic Rollout
10
8
9
10
Refinement
272
541
192
581
Total ECHO
327
592
231
649
GRPO Rollout
259
502
168
552
Total GRPO
273
519
184
581
Overhead (%)
+19
+14
+25
+11
for the policy and the critic performed on the same on-policy batch.
Algorithm 1: ECHO: Evolving Critic for Hindsight-Guided Optimization
Input
:Dataset D; reward model R; policy Pθ; critic Cψ; group size N; GRPO hyperparams
(ϵ, β); smoothing η > 0.
Output :Updated parameters (θ, ψ).
1 foreach training step do
2
Sample a batch of queries q ∼D
// Stage 0: On-policy proposal and baseline score
3
Sample initial trajectory τo ∼Pθ(· | q)
4
Compute baseline score so ←R(q, τo)
// Stage 1: Multi-view diagnosis (critic group)
5
for j ←1 to N do
6
Sample critique c(j)
o
∼Cψ(· | q, τo, so)
7
GC ←{c(j)
o }N
j=1
// Stage 2: Conditional refinement (policy group)
8
for j ←1 to N do
9
Form augmented input ˜q(j) ←(q, c(j)
o )
10
Sample refinement τ (j)
r
∼Pθ(· | ˜q(j))
11
Evaluate post-correction score s(j)
r
←R(q, τ (j)
r )
12
GP (q) ←{τ (j)
r }N
j=1
// Saturation-aware critic reward for each critique
13
for j ←1 to N do
14
r(j)
c
←ln

1−so+η
1−s(j)
r +η

// Eq. 6
// Dual-track group-relative advantage estimation
15
Compute policy advantages {A(j)
P }N
j=1 by group-relative normalization of {s(j)
r }N
j=1
16
Compute critic advantages {A(j)
C }N
j=1 by group-relative normalization of {r(j)
c }N
j=1
// Synchronized GRPO updates (same batch, two tracks)
17
Update θ by maximizing the GRPO surrogate objective J (θ) using sequences {τ (j)
r } with
advantages {A(j)
P }
18
Update ψ by maximizing the GRPO surrogate objective J (ψ) using sequences {c(j)
o } with
advantages {A(j)
C }

E
Prompt for Critic Model
We provide the exact prompting template used to elicit critiques from the critic model in Box A.1. The
prompt constrains the critic to ground its feedback in the official scoring information and to output at
most 1–2 high-level, actionable suggestions in a fixed format, which stabilizes training and keeps critiques
consistent across rollouts.
Box A.1 : The prompt for critique generation.
You are a **Critic model**, used to provide guidance on a model’s overall performance on a given
task.
The system will provide you with:
- The user’s task description;
- Several rounds of the model’s interactions with the environment as it attempts to complete the
task;
- The official final scoring.
Your task: **Strictly based on the official scoring information**, output clear improvement
suggestions and behavioral guidance inside the <critic> tag. Only point out issues and directions
for improvement. Do not mention strengths, and do not give praise or encouragement.
## Input Description
Each round of the model’s actions is provided within ‘<model_response>...</model_response>‘.
Environment feedback is provided within ‘<env_feedback>...</env_feedback>‘.
## Official Scoring Criteria (for your understanding; do not modify or question)
{Detail scoring criteria on specific task.}
You must:
- Treat the official scoring result as absolutely correct and final.
- Not reinterpret, question, or adjust the official score.
## Original Question
{original_prompt}
## Response to be Evaluated
{initial_response}
## Official Scoring Information
{score_info_text}
## Output Format
You must output **only** the following two tags and their contents. Do not add or remove tags,
and do not output anything outside these tags:
```
<reason>
Your detailed reasoning process:
- Based on the official scoring information, analyze the model’s performance on each scoring
dimension;
- Strictly follow the official scoring information; do not question, revise, or supplement it;

- Whenever you have any doubts or subjective judgments about any evaluation dimension, always
take the official scoring conclusion as the final basis.
</reason>
<critic>
Your final guidance:
- If the model’s score is a full score (1 point), directly return "none".
- Give **at most 1–2** brief, high-level suggestions; only mention the most critical issues.
- Do **not** refer to specific reply text or dialogue details; only describe how model should
change its general behavior or strategy.
- Do not give any praise or encouragement; only point out problems and how You should improve.
- Always address the model as **"You"** (second person), not "the model", "it", or similar.
</critic>
```Based on the above standards, provide guidance on the given model’s behavior, and output in
the specified format.
## Output
Now, begin your reasoning!
